<introduction>
# Introduction

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
COMPUTAGEBENCH:
EPIGENETIC AGING CLOCKS
BENCHMARK
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
The success of clinical trials of longevity drugs relies heavily on identifying in-
tegrative health and aging biomarkers, such as biological age. Epigenetic aging
clocks predict the biological age of an individual using their DNA methylation
profiles, commonly retrieved from blood samples. However, there is no standard-
ized methodology to validate and compare epigenetic clock models as yet. We
propose ComputAgeBench, a unifying framework that comprises such a method-
ology and a dataset for comprehensive benchmarking of different clinically rel-
evant aging clocks. Our methodology exploits the core idea that reliable aging
clocks must be able to distinguish between healthy individuals and those with
aging-accelerating conditions. Specifically, we collected and harmonized 66 pub-
lic datasets of blood DNA methylation, covering 19 such conditions across differ-
ent ages and tested 13 published clock models. We believe our work will bring
the fields of aging biology and machine learning closer together for the research
on reliable biomarkers of health and aging.
1
INTRODUCTION
Longevity drugs (a.k.a., geroprotectors) appear to be on the brink of entering clinical practice to
slow down or reverse the features of aging (Moqri et al., 2024; Justice et al., 2018). The research
community is yet to identify proper biomarkers of aging and rejuvenation that could be used as
clinical trial endpoints instead of or in combination with observations on patient lifespans (Schork
et al., 2022). Biological age (BA) has been proposed as one of such surrogate biomarkers of aging,
defined as a generalized measure of human health compared to the average health of individuals at a
given age within a population (Yousefi et al., 2022; Jylh¨av¨a et al., 2017). Thus, if an individual has a
biological age of 40 at the chronological age of 30, it is assumed that their overall health corresponds
to that of an average 40-year-old in the population. This relationship can be concisely expressed as
B = C + ∆,
(1)
where B represents biological age, C denotes chronological age (i.e., time since birth), and ∆
symbolizes BA acceleration (or deceleration, if negative).
In general, BA can be estimated from a set of biomarkers X with a model (algorithm) f : X →
B, also called an aging clock. However, BA is latent: it has no ground truth value that can be
measured directly and then used to train an aging clock model f in a classical supervised fashion,
making clock validation a nontrivial task (Sluiskes et al., 2024). This obstacle forces researchers to
introduce various additional assumptions about the aging clock behavior (Klemera & Doubal, 2006;
Horvath, 2013; Pierson et al., 2019; Rutledge et al., 2022), as well as to experiment with different
machine learning models (including penalized linear regressions, such as ElasticNet, support vector
machines, decision trees, transfomer-based neural networks, etc. (Rutledge et al., 2022; Urban
et al., 2023)) and underlying types of data X (Putin et al., 2016; Xia et al., 2020; Holzscheck et al.,
2021). The vast majority of aging clocks, though, rely primarily on DNA methylation data, also
called epigenetic aging clocks (Hannum et al., 2013; Levine et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2019; Galkin
et al., 2021; Ying et al., 2024). Summarizing abundant discussions about a “good” mathematical
description of BA in the literature (Moskalev, 2019; Rutledge et al., 2022; Moqri et al., 2024), we
elicited four of its defining properties, formalized as follows.
Let X ∈Rp, where p is the number of biomarkers in data, B ∈R, and f : X →B. Given the aging
acceleration ∆= B −C, the following four properties hold:
1

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Model
ComputeAgeBench
Age
accelerating
condition
Healthy
control
p-value
Age acceleration
Blood data
Chronological Age
CpG site
Dataset
Averaging
across cells
...
...
...
...
...
CpGN
1
CpG
...
Figure 1: ComputAgeBench: benchmarking various epigenetic aging clock models. For a dataset
X, obtained by profiling DNA methylation at CpG sites in bulk blood samples, an aging clock
model f is trained to distinguish healthy individuals from those with pre-defined aging-accelerating
conditions.
1. B is expressed in the same time units as C;
2. ∆allows distinguishing between healthy individuals and individuals with aging-
accelerating or decelerating conditions (AACs or ADCs), such as severe chronic diseases;
3. B helps to predict the remaining lifespan better than C does (Moskalev, 2019);
4. B helps to predict the time to onset of chronic age-related diseases (e.g., the Alzheimer’s)
better than C does (Moskalev, 2019).
Garnered together, these properties motivated us to construct a benchmarking methodology for val-
idating the potential biological age predictors. In property #1, the model f should output age values
in a biologically meaningful range, comparable with a typical lifespan, e.g., from 0 to 120 years
for the humans. To investigate if a model f satisfies the 2nd property, we can define a panel of
aging-accelerating (or decelerating) conditions and test if the predicted ∆allows distinguishing the
individuals with an AAC/ADC from a control group, according to an appropriate statistical test. To
validate the compliance with the 3rd and the 4th properties, one also needs data on mortality and
multi-morbidity. That is, the information about the timing of death or the onset of chronic age-
related diseases, along with a prior measurement of a set of relevant biomarkers. It is important to
note that such data are highly sensitive and are generally not publicly available.
DNA methylation (DNAm) is the most prevalent measurement employed in the construction of aging
clocks (Xia et al., 2021). From a chemical point of view, DNA methylation refers to a covalent
modification of DNA nucleotides by the methyl groups (Greenberg & Bourc’his, 2019). Specifically,
cytosine nucleotides (C) followed by guanine nucleotides (G), also referred to as cytosines in a CpG
context or simply CpG sites (CpGs), are methylated most often in the mammalian cells, making it the
most well-studied type of DNA methylation (Seale et al., 2022) (refer to Fig. 1 for visualization of
the DNA and CpGs). This epigenetic modification plays a crucial role in regulating gene expression
and is engaged in a variety of cellular events, varying significantly across different species, tissues,
and the lifespan. DNA methylation levels per site are usually reported quantitatively as beta values
that represent the methylation proportion at a specific CpG site in the range from 0 to 1, where 0
indicates no methylation, and 1 indicates complete methylation across all the cells in the sample
(Fig. 1).
Importantly, despite the numerous recent publications of various aging clocks (Xia et al., 2021; Rut-
ledge et al., 2022; Yousefi et al., 2022), including the ones built on DNA methylation, no systematic
open access benchmark, which would include standardized panel of datasets, diseases, interven-
tions, or other conditions, has been proposed to date to validate the aforementioned properties. In
this paper, we introduce such a benchmark to validate the 1st and the 2nd properties in epigenetic
aging clocks. To do this, we developed a methodology for identifying aging-accelerating conditions,
which relies on simple, yet strict and evidence-based principles for defining and selecting a panel of
aging-accelerating conditions. We collected an unprecedented number of DNA methylation datasets
for the respective conditions from dozens of published studies. We also developed a cumulative
benchmarking score that aggregates two error-based tasks and two simple, but informative tasks
based on common statistical tests. Ultimately, this cumulative score enables comparing aging clock
ability to satisfy the 1st and the 2nd properties.
2
</introduction>

<related_work_and_background>
# Related work and Background

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
To demonstrate our methodology in a clinically relevant scenario, we specifically focused on the
blood-, saliva-, and buccal-based epigenetic biomarkers obtained via a microarray-based technology.
Such biomarkers are widespread in clinical testing and aging clock construction (Campagna et al.,
2021; Rutledge et al., 2022). We then examined 13 published epigenetic clocks and provided their
benchmarking results.
2
RELATED WORK AND BACKGROUND
2.1
AGING CLOCK CONSTRUCTION METHODOLOGY
Because the BA ground truth values cannot be measured, and, therefore, a direct validation of ag-
ing clocks is problematic, previous studies introduced various approaches to construct aging clocks
with different underlying assumptions. The most widespread one, belonging to the so-called “first-
generation aging clocks”, uses an assumption that a model f can be trained to predict chronological
age, i.e., C = ˆC +ε = f(X)+ε, and its predictions will correspond to BA: B = ˆC. The simplicity
of this approach has made it attractive for decades, and it is still used today to train new aging clocks
on new types of data (Hollingsworth et al., 1965; Voitenko & Tokar, 1983; Duggirala et al., 2002;
Varshavsky et al., 2023; Prosz et al., 2024). In fact, BA obtained by this approach can satisfy the
2nd (Horvath, 2013) and the 3rd (Kuiper et al., 2023) properties from our definition. However, using
this assumption in Eq. (1) leads us to the conclusion that ε = −∆. It then turns out that the perfect
solution of the chronological age prediction problem, i.e., minimizing the prediction error so that
ε →0, leads to the inability of a clock to identify any aging acceleration or deceleration. Namely,
it implies that ∆→−0, which is also known as the biomarkers paradox (Hochschild, 1989; Kle-
mera & Doubal, 2006). Supporting this concept, it has been shown that the clocks featuring strong
correlation with the chronological age poorly correlate with the population mortality (Zhang et al.,
2019) (hence they fail to satisfy the 3rd property). As a consequence, validating clock performance
in terms of accuracy of chronological age prediction becomes meaningless, because high accuracy
may not necessarily correspond to a biologically relevant clock. Despite the obvious methodological
challenges of this approach, it is worth noting that the vast majority of aging clocks belong to the
first generation (Sluiskes et al., 2024).
Seeking for a better solution, researchers experimented with survival models, which led to the de-
velopment of ”second-generation aging clocks”. In this approach, models are trained to predict
time to death (Levine et al., 2018; Lu et al., 2019; Hertel et al., 2016), and the resulting predic-
tion is rescaled to age units to represent BA, therefore addressing the 3rd and the 4th properties of
a ”good” BA estimator. However, there is no open large-scale DNA methylation data containing
time-to-death or multi-morbidity measurements, with existing studies being either available upon an
authorized request or being held completely private (see Appendix A.7).
2.2
ATTEMPTS TO COMPARE EPIGENETIC AGING CLOCKS
Despite reported attempts to compare the performance of different aging clocks, a benchmark with
a standardized panel of datasets, diseases, interventions, or other conditions has not been proposed
yet. As a result, different comparative studies employ widely varying validation data and approaches
(Moqri et al., 2024; Ying et al., 2024; Kuiper et al., 2023; Mei et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021; Huan
et al., 2022; Chervova et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2020; Maddock et al., 2020; McCrory et al., 2021).
As highlighted in a recent review on biomarker validation by Moqri et al. (2024), “for a reliable
comparison across studies, ...biomarker formulations should be established ‘a priori’ and not be
further modified during validation”. In the same line of thought, we propose to define a standardized
and a justified procedure for clock benchmarking before constructing any predictive model.
Two approaches we propose as essential tasks in our benchmark entail related prior art. For example,
Porter et al. (2021) and Mei et al. (2023) used one-sample or two-sample aging acceleration tests for
clock validation. Ying et al. (2024) employed two-sample tests across multiple aging clocks. These
authors implicitly tested the 2nd property of “good” aging clocks discussed above. Likewise, there
were also attempts to test the 3rd and the 4th properties separately. In other works, including the
recently updated pre-print of Biolearn (Ying et al., 2023), a Python-based framework for aging clock
training and testing in ongoing development, authors performed Cox Proportional Hazards analysis
and calculated hazard ratios with statistical significance to test if BA estimates of selected clocks are
3
</related_work_and_background>

<benchmarking_methodology>
# Benchmarking Methodology

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
capable of predicting all-cause mortality or the onset of age-related diseases (e.g., cardiovascular
events) (Kuiper et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2021; McCrory et al., 2021; Huan et al., 2022; Chervova
et al., 2022; Ying et al., 2023). However, these prior studies are either small-scale (Ying et al., 2024),
limited to predicting the chronological age (Liu et al., 2020), or miss standardized datasets and
compare only a small number of models (Porter et al., 2021; Mei et al., 2023), or rely on mortality
and disease data that are under restricted access (Ying et al., 2023). Therefore, while developing our
methodology, we attempted to mitigate all mentioned drawbacks.
3
BENCHMARKING METHODOLOGY
An infographic overview of the proposed benchmarking of aging clocks is shown in Fig. 2.
3.1
CRITERIA FOR SELECTING AGING-ACCELERATING CONDITIONS
In the context of clock benchmarking, we propose to define an aging-accelerating condition (AAC)
as a biological condition that satisfies the following three criteria (Fig. 2B). First, having an AAC
must lead to decreased life expectancy (LE) compared to the general population, even when treated
with existing therapies. Second, an AAC must be chronic (to safely assume that it has sufficient
time to drive observable changes in DNAm). And third, an AAC must manifest itself systemically,
so that it can be expected to affect DNAm in blood, saliva, and buccal cells (hereafter referred to as
BSB).
Importantly, the decrease in LE and the corresponding increase in mortality must result mainly from
intrinsic organismal causes rather than from socioeconomic factors and self-destructive behaviors
related to a given condition. The second criterion is aimed at excluding short-term conditions such
as acute infectious diseases, stressful events, and other confounding DNAm-alternating accidents,
whose effects might not induce significant changes in DNAm data obtained from BSB, or, on the
contrary, might last too briefly to be reliably detected. The third part of the AAC definition pre-
cludes us from considering events with long-lasting and life-threatening consequences that might be
difficult to observe in BSB-derived data. For instance, a bone fracture (unless it is a critical bone
marrow reserve) or some types of malignancies.
Conversely, an aging-decelerating condition (ADC) is defined as a condition that increases LE,
compared to the general population, and features the same second and third criteria as an AAC.
With human data, however, the ADCs are difficult to determine, as the human lifespan-increasing
interventions are yet to emerge. To avoid ambiguous interpretation, we omitted such conditions in
our benchmarking of human aging clocks (see Appendix A.5 and Table A2 for more details).
3.2
CRITERIA FOR DATASET SELECTION
Aiming to provide a comprehensive, easily accessible, and clinically relevant toolbox for the ongo-
ing research on human epigenetic clocks, we relied on the following five criteria while performing
the datasets aggregation (Fig. 2C). First, all datasets in the benchmark must feature open access
to pre-processed data, without any data access requests or raw data processing required. Second,
we only used data obtained from the BSB samples. Third, chronological ages must be annotated
with, at most, one year intervals (e.g., without age binning by decades), including only samples
from the age range of 18–90 years1. The only exception to this requirement are the individuals
with certain progeroid conditions, such as the Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome, who survive
approximately 12 to 13 years on average: these conditions resemble premature aging so strikingly
(Schnabel et al., 2021) that we included patients aged under 18 years into the benchmark. Fourth, we
employ data obtained only with the Illumina Infinium BeadChip (27K, 450K, and 850K) methyla-
tion microarrays, as they remain to be the most popular technologies for human DNAm profiling and
clock construction. Fifth, we applied thresholds of at least 10 samples per dataset, 5 samples with
an AAC per dataset, and 10 samples with an AAC across all datasets to attain sufficient statistical
power.
1Reporting increased or decreased biological age for people outside of this range is debatable.
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
1. Open access to pre-processed data
2. Sample sources: blood, saliva, and buccal cells (BSB)
3. Annotated ages: 18-90 yo (except progeroid)
4. Data type: DNA methylation microarrays (27K/450K/850K)
5. 10+ samples per dataset, 10+ samples per condition
1. Decreases life expectancy, even if treated
2. Сhronic
has suﬃcient time to drive changes in DNAm
3. Manifests systemically
aﬀects DNAm in blood, saliva, or buccal cells
Dataset
of aging-accelerating conditions (ACCs)
Assumption:
AAC increases BA
Low
High
Clock training
BenchScore
Applying the clock for
BA estimation
Benchmarking
on predeﬁned dataset
Neurodegenerative
diseases (NDD)
Musculoskeletal
diseases (MSD)
Respiratory
diseases (RSD)
Cardiovascular
diseases (CVD)
Liver
diseases (LD)
Metabolic
diseases (MBD)
Kidney
diseases (KD)
Immune system
diseases (ISD)
Progeroid
syndromes (PGS)
Figure 2: ComputAgeBench methodology. A) The proposed pipeline for constructing aging clocks
features an important step of validating the model on pre-defined aging-acceleration conditions that
satisfy criteria (B) and are collected into datasets that meet criteria (C) for individual study design.
D) Major classes that include putative aging-accelerating conditions. E) Aggregated dataset panel
for benchmarking aging clocks, comprising 66 unique data sources (labeled by their Gene Expres-
sion Omnibus dataset identification numbers and conditions) from more than 50 studies. See Table
A2 for the full names and Table A3 for the population-based evidence for including each condition.
3.3
COLLECTING AAC DATASETS FOR BENCHMARKING
To cover as many organismal systems affected by age-related conditions as possible, we split the
aggregated data into nine broad categories (Fig. 2D): cardiovascular diseases (CVD), immune sys-
tem diseases (ISD), kidney diseases (KDD), liver diseases (LVD), metabolic diseases (MBD), mus-
culoskeletal diseases (MSD), neurodegenerative diseases (NDD), respiratory diseases (RSD), and
progeroid syndromes (PGS). In each class, we identified several AACs relying on the established
lists of age-related diseases and on the leading causes of death (Mei et al., 2023; Li et al., 2021;
Ferrari et al., 2024), including closely associated conditions and other conditions mentioned in a
variety of epigenetic clock studies (Horvath, 2013; Levine et al., 2018; Ying et al., 2024; Mei et al.,
2023; Horvath et al., 2018). The corresponding AACs with their abbreviations and population-based
evidence for their inclusion are provided in Appendix (Tables A2 and A3, respectively).
Dataset search was performed using the NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, an
omics data repository with unrestricted access (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/).
We applied filters to include the Homo sapiens species and all types of methylation-related stud-
ies: methylation profiling by single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array, methylation profiling by
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
array, methylation profiling by genome tiling array, and methylation profiling by high throughput
sequencing (methylation microarray data can be found in any of these study types).
Upon performing the dataset search, only a portion of AACs from seven condition classes were
retained (see Appendix and Table A3). All five dataset selection criteria were met by none of the
found kidney- and liver-related AAC datasets. The resulting list of 66 datasets (Reynolds et al.,
2014; Nazarenko et al., 2015; Soriano-T´arraga et al., 2016; Istas et al., 2017; Cullell et al., 2022;
Harris et al., 2012; Horvath & Levine, 2015; Gross et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Li Yim et al.,
2016; Ventham et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2017; 2018; Oriol-Tordera et al., 2020; DiNardo et al.,
2020; Oriol-Tordera et al., 2022; Esteban-Cantos et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2013; Fernandez-Rebollo
et al., 2018; Rhead et al., 2017; Clark et al., 2020; Tao et al., 2021; de la Calle-Fabregat et al.,
2021; Juli`a et al., 2022; Chen et al., 2023; Day et al., 2013; Rakyan et al., 2011; Lunnon et al., 2015;
Ramos-Molina et al., 2019; Noronha et al., 2022; Marabita et al., 2013; Lunnon et al., 2014; Horvath
& Ritz, 2015; Castro et al., 2019; Kular et al., 2018; Chuang et al., 2017; 2019; Ntranos et al., 2019;
Ewing et al., 2019; Carlstr¨om et al., 2019; Roubroeks et al., 2020; Go et al., 2020; Dabin et al., 2020;
Bingen et al., 2022; Esterhuyse et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2021; 2020; Maierhofer et al., 2019; Bejaoui
et al., 2022; Qannan et al., 2023) comprises 65 blood studies and 1 saliva study, and is visualized in
Fig. 2E. An overview of all datasets, dataset sizes, and their age distributions is provided in Fig. A1.
Descriptive statistics for all datasets are provided in Fig. A2.
We unified the metadata of all datasets by retrieving only the relevant metadata columns and format-
ting them into the appropriate data types, similarly to what was proposed by the authors of Biolearn
(Ying et al., 2023), another recent effort in the clock community. We also added the condition and
condition class annotation, thus obtaining a single metadata file with 10,410 rows (samples) and the
following columns: SampleID, DatasetID (dataset GEO accession number), PlatformID (sequenc-
ing platform), Tissue (blood or saliva), CellType (whole blood or cell type after sorting), Gender,
Age, Condition, and Class (see also Appendix A.9 for details on data processing).
3.4
EPIGENETIC AGE PREDICTORS
Any blood-based epigenetic aging clock that predicts BA in age units (or can be re-scaled to them)
can be validated in our benchmark. We tested 13 publicly available epigenetic clock models trained
on adult human data to evaluate sample age (Table A4), with the model coefficients retrieved from
the corresponding studies. Among the collected first-generation clocks, 6 were trained purely on
blood samples (Hannum et al., 2013; Ying et al., 2024; Lin et al., 2016; Vidal-Bralo et al., 2016),
and 3 models were trained on multiple tissues (Horvath, 2013; Zhang et al., 2019; Horvath et al.,
2018). Among the second-generation clocks, all were blood-based, and 2 models relied entirely on
CpG sites as predictive features (Levine et al., 2018; Higgins-Chen et al., 2022), while the other 2
required additional information about gender and chronological age as inputs (Lu et al., 2019; 2022).
Because the extracted datasets contained missing values, we imputed them with the ”gold standard”
beta values averaged for each CpG site retrieving them from the R ”SeSAMe” package (Zhou et al.,
2018) (for the results on comparing imputation methods, see Appendix A.3). We also ensured that
no data in the benchmark was used to train any of the selected clocks, and that all clock input and
output structures are consistent with each other (”harmonized”, as described by Ying et al. (2023)).
The clock models evaluated by us are described in Table A4.
3.5
BENCHMARKING TASKS FOR EVALUATING AGING CLOCKS
To benchmark aging clock models, we propose four tasks: relative aging acceleration prediction
(Fig. 3A), absolute aging acceleration prediction (Fig. 3B), chronological age prediction accuracy
(Fig. 3C), and systematic chronological age prediction bias (Fig. 3D). In the first two tasks, the
clocks are tested if they can correctly predict aging acceleration in the predefined panel of AAC
datasets.
In the relative aging acceleration prediction task (AA2 task), we test aging clock ability to distin-
guish AAC from healthy control (HC) samples in a dataset containing both sample groups. After
predicting ages in each dataset corresponding to this task using various clock models, we apply a
two-sample Welch’s test per dataset and calculate a one-sided P-value (i.e., HA : ∆AAC > ∆HC) to
determine if mean aging acceleration in the AAC cohort is significantly greater than that in the HC
cohort (Fig. 3A). Next, we apply the Benjamini-Hochberg correction procedure for controlling the
6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
false discovery rate (FDR) of predictions across all datasets, with an adjusted P-value less than 0.05
considered indicative of statistical significance. We selected a parametric test due to the assump-
tion of normal distribution of ∆, a fundamental trait of the multivariate linear regression models
commonly used in aging clock construction.
In the absolute aging acceleration prediction task (AA1 task), we test clock ability to correctly
predict positive aging acceleration for an AAC in the absence of the HC cohort. For each dataset
in this task, we predict ages using various clock models, apply a one-sample Student’s t-test and
calculate a one-sided P-value (i.e., HA : ∆AAC > 0) to determine if mean aging acceleration in
the AAC cohort is significantly greater than zero (Fig. 3B). As before, we apply the Benjamini-
Hochberg correction procedure for controlling FDR with the same adjusted P-value threshold.
Clearly, the first task (AA2) provides a more rigorous way to test aging clocks compared to AA1,
because it helps to control potential covariate shifts, but the second task (AA1) deserves its place
in the list, as it allows including more data into the panel to overcome data scarcity. The third
task is aimed at distinguishing good predictors of chronological age from predictors of biological
age. Due to the paradox of biomarkers mentioned above, it is highly unlikely that the same model
could combine both these properties. Yet, the good predictors of chronological age are believed to be
useful in forensics (Paparazzo et al., 2023) or data labeling, where the chronological age information
is lacking. We chose median absolute aging acceleration (Med(|∆|)), a full equivalent of median
absolute error, for testing clock performance. We calculate it across HC samples from the whole
dataset panel and report it as a single number expressed in years.
We introduced the fourth task, a prediction bias task, to evaluate the robustness of a given aging
clock model to covariate shift between the original clock training dataset and the datasets from the
proposed benchmark. Covariate shift, also referred to as batch effect in bioinformatics, denotes the
shift between covariate distributions in two datasets. For instance, the distribution of methylation
values for a given CpG site could be centered around 0.45 in one dataset and around 0.55 in the
other one—a common scenario in DNAm and other omics data. Because each clock is trained on
healthy controls, we expect age deviation of HC samples to be zero on average (i.e., E(∆HC) = 0).
In practice, however, due to the presence of a covariate shift between the training and testing data,
a clock might produce biased predictions, resulting in a systemic bias and adding or subtracting
extra years for a healthy individual coming from an external dataset. The goal of the fourth task
is to control for such systemic bias in clock predictions. Therefore, as a benchmarking metric for
this task, we calculated median aging acceleration (Med(∆)) across HC samples from the entire
dataset panel, which reflects the systematic shift in clock predictions caused by differences between
datasets.
3.6
CUMULATIVE BENCHMARKING SCORE
We define cumulative benchmarking score such that it would account for the main drawback of AA1
task, namely, the sensitivity to positive model bias. Let SAA2 denote total score of a model in AA2
task and SAA1 from the AA1 task (both SAA2 and SAA1 represent the number of datasets evaluated
correctly by a model in the respective task), then the cumulative benchmarking score is:
BenchScore = SAA2 + SAA1 ·

1 −max(0, Med(∆))
Med(|∆|)

.
(2)
Consequently, if a model is positively biased, its performance in the AA1 task will be penalized by
the bracketed coefficient by the SAA1, the largest when the model bias Med(∆) is zero. Because
Med(∆) ≤Med(|∆|), this coefficient is limited to the [0, 1] interval.
While designing our metric, we aimed for simplicity and interpretability. At the same time, we
sought to include more data in the benchmark to address data scarcity caused by the underrepresen-
tation of certain AACs. Admittedly, there could be a more optimal solution for the metric, but we
also believe that such a solution must be proposed by a continuous collaborative discussion between
the aging clock and machine learning communities, which we are eager to establish.
7
</benchmarking_methodology>

<results>
# Results

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Age acceleration
two sample test (AA2)
Age accelerating
condition
Healthy
control
p-value
0
Age acceleration
A
p-value
Age acceleration
one sample test (AA1)
Age accelerating condition
0
Age acceleration
B
Chronological age
prediction accuracy
Chronological age
Predicted age
C
Chronological age
prediction bias
Chronological age
Predicted age
D
Age acceleration two sample test (AA2) results
E
Age acceleration one sample test (AA1) results
F
Figure 3: ComputAgeBench tasks and performance of aging clock models. A-D) The four bench-
marking tasks. (C) illustrates that chronological age prediction accuracy is measured by median
absolute error (Med(|∆|)) across all predictions. For a limiting case of prediction bias sketched in
(D), all samples were predicted with positive age acceleration, leading to a strictly positive value
of Med(∆), graphically represented as a red arrow pointing to a cross. E) AA2 task results split
into columns by condition class, where scores demonstrate the number of datasets per class, where
a given clock model detected significant difference between the HC and AAC cohorts. F) AA1 task
results: same as (E), but the statistics are calculated for datasets containing the AAC cohort alone.
4
RESULTS
The most rigorous of the four, AA2 task demonstrates that second-generation aging clocks (Phe-
noAgeV2 (Higgins-Chen et al., 2022), GrimAgeV1 (Lu et al., 2019), GrimAgeV2 (Lu et al., 2022),
and PhenoAgeV1 (Levine et al., 2018)) appear on top, particularly at predicting aging accelera-
tion for the ISD class (Fig. 3E, Supplementary Materials Fig. A5). Nevertheless, all clocks failed
to detect aging acceleration in patients with cardiovascular and metabolic diseases, at least at the
statistically significant level (see Figs. A3 and A4 for results without FDR correction). Modest
scores (<50% datasets in total) on the AA2 task across all models are expected, as no clocks had
specifically been calibrated to pass this benchmarking task.
In contrast, the first-generation aging clocks by Zhang et al. (2019) and Hannum et al. (2013) pop-
ulated the top of the AA1 leaderboard, in addition to the GrimAge, exhibiting good scores across
multiple condition classes (Fig. 3F, Supplementary Materials Fig. A6). Notably, combining the
results of this task with the model bias task exposes the potential source of the exceptional “robust-
ness” in predicting accelerated aging in datasets without healthy controls.
The task of chronological age prediction accuracy reveals two undeniable leaders: HorvathV2 (Hor-
vath et al., 2018) and HorvathV1 (Horvath, 2013) clocks (Table 1), specifically tuned for this task
on large multi-tissue datasets. Notably, clocks predicting chronological age with Med(|∆|) ≥18
years would be inferior to a constant model yielding a 50 y.o. prediction (average age across all HC
samples in the benchmark). Unless scaled, such clocks can hardly be used for inferring accelerated
aging.
Finally, to prove the validity of AA1 performance, a clock should also pass the task for being un-
biased. We show that the AA1 leader, GrimAgeV2 clock (Lu et al., 2022), is also characterized by
8
</results>

<discussion>
# Discussion

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Table 1: Benchmarking results.
Model name
AA2 score
AA1 score
Med(|∆|), years
Med(∆), years
BenchScore
PhenoAgeV2
20
9
7.6 ±0.1
-2.6 ±0.1
29.0
GrimAgeV1
14
15
7.5 ±0.1
5.7 ±0.1
17.4
PhenoAgeV1
9
7
8.0 ±0.1
-4.2 ±0.2
16.0
GrimAgeV2
14
20
9.8 ±0.1
9.3 ±0.1
15.1
HorvathV1
3
12
5.4 ±0.1
-0.1 ±0.1
15.0
HorvathV2
5
12
4.1 ±0.1
1.1 ±0.1
13.9
VidalBralo
0
13
9.1 ±0.1
0.1 ±0.2
12.8
Lin
5
9
7.5 ±0.1
2.1 ±0.2
11.4
YingAdaptAge
5
11
20.0 ±0.2
12.5 ±0.5
9.1
YingCausAge
6
2
9.0 ±0.1
1.3 ±0.2
7.7
YingDamAge
0
6
19.5 ±0.3
-14.5 ±0.5
6.0
Zhang19 EN
2
19
10.5 ±0.2
9.6 ±0.2
3.7
Hannum
1
17
7.5 ±0.1
6.3 ±0.1
3.7
a large prediction bias for the HC samples (Table 1), warning us against considering its AA1 task
score reliable. On the other hand, the top-2 unbiased HorvathV1 clock (Horvath, 2013) and Vidal-
Bralo clock (Vidal-Bralo et al., 2016) have low prediction bias, rendering their AA1 performance as
more trustworthy.
To account for the discrepancies of AA1 task interpretation regarding the prediction bias, we devised
cumulative benchmarking score (Table 1) which penalizes AA1 score by the magnitude of prediction
bias (see Eq. 2). With such a metric, a second-generation aging clock PhenoAgeV2 (Higgins-Chen
et al., 2022) becomes the most robust model in terms of distinguishing individuals with aging-
accelerating conditions from the healthy cohort. This model is a leader, according to the cumulative
benchmarking score and the AA2 task score. Closely behind it, are the other second-generation
clocks: GrimAgeV1 (Lu et al., 2019), PhenoAgeV1 (Levine et al., 2018), and GrimAgeV2 (Lu
et al., 2022). On the other hand, our results indicate that even the classic first-generation aging
clocks, such as HorvathV1 (Horvath, 2013) and HorvathV2 (Horvath et al., 2018), can perform
quite reliably in predicting biological age, at least for some condition classes. It is noteworthy that
in both AA1 and AA2 tasks, many aging clocks perform well in detecting accelerated aging caused
by immune system diseases, which are mostly represented by human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)
infection in our dataset, while the other disease classes are only captured by some clocks, allegedly
indicating that they were implicitly and unintentionally trained for certain subset of diseases. These
results generalize previous findings (Mei et al., 2023) and show that comprehensive benchmarking
of aging clocks can resolve the controversy regarding their robustness and utility.
5
DISCUSSION
Biological age is an elusive concept that cannot be measured and validated directly, which necessi-
tates careful choice of model assumptions to avoid methodological errors and false discoveries while
estimating it. While maintaining some degree of correlation between predicted and chronological
age is desirable, the biomarkers paradox (Klemera & Doubal, 2006) precludes one from automati-
cally accepting a BA estimation as acceptable (via the classic performance metrics of chronological
age prediction accuracy). From a methodological perspective, training BA predictors to estimate
time to death or a disease onset remains the most rigorous approach to aging clock validation, as
these events can be measured directly. However, obtaining such data is challenging due to various
ethical and financial constraints. At present, no open access data of DNA methylation with mortality
labels are available for public clock benchmarking (see Appendix A.7).
While mortality data remain unavailable, we propose to validate clocks by their ability to demon-
strate BA acceleration in a fixed pre-determined panel of datasets for established aging-accelerating
diseases or predict decelerated aging in the datasets of lifespan-prolonging interventions. For that,
we developed our benchmark, where each aging clock could be tested across 4 distinct tasks. We
gathered an unprecedented number of DNA methylation datasets from more than 50 studies,
9
</discussion>

<conclusion>
# Conclusion

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
covering 19 putative aging-accelerating conditions. Notably, no aging-decelerating conditions
have been confirmed for the benchmark study (see Appendix A.5). It should be taken into account
that in vitro cell reprogramming cannot serve as validation data for the deceleration effect, because,
as has previously been shown (Kriukov et al., 2023), such data are essentially out-of-domain with
regard to blood DNA methylation across aging.
To showcase our benchmark, we tested 13 different published models and revealed that the second-
generation aging clocks, namely, PhenoAge (Levine et al., 2018), GrimAge (Lu et al., 2019), and
their upgraded variants (Higgins-Chen et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022), were the most successful, ac-
cording to the cumulative benchmarking score. As these clocks had initially been designed to predict
all-cause mortality, they were expected to be robust in distinguishing aging-accelerating conditions.
Yet, our findings reinforce the growing trends in training BA predictors based on mortality rather
than chronological age (Yousefi et al., 2022; Moqri et al., 2024).
As blood DNA methylation generally comes from the immune cells, which would be directly af-
fected by the HIV, it is not surprising that the majority of clocks managed to discern accelerated
aging in the immune system-related conditions (featured predominantly by the HIV infection in our
dataset). This result supports the notion that the blood-based clocks might be implicitly attuned to
such conditions, while only a few clocks are capable of successfully capturing accelerated aging in
the other disease classes.
Remarkably, some datasets were evaluated incorrectly by all models, which may have several pos-
sible explanations apart from the poor clock performance. First, a strong covariate shift between
these data and the training data might impede model performance on some datasets. Second, some
selected conditions might not induce accelerated aging in blood, either by itself or by the design of
the original study (see Limitations in Appendix A.1). Third, the multidimensionality of aging as a
biological phenomenon might not allow for correct prediction of all aging-accelerating conditions
by such univariate measures as the blood-based epigenetic clocks. In favor of this notion, it has
recently been shown that different organ systems have different aging trajectories (Schaum et al.,
2020; Oh et al., 2023), suggesting several directions for the future research, outlined in Appendix
A.2.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work, we developed the first systematic benchmark for evaluating blood-based epigenetic
aging clocks. We believe it will help longevity researchers and data scientists to better gauge the
power of existing biomarkers of aging, quantitatively assessing their role, limitations, and reliability.
We anticipate that, as a result of such computational paradigm, rapid and reliable clinical trials of
lifespan-extending therapies will become an attainable reality in a not-so-distant future.
7
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We assured the reproducibility of our pipeline by providing a Google Colab notebook (https://
colab.research.google.com/drive/1_nrGMUd8oH8ADNWUPNeXHr4ZAJlZOQhm),
which allows to download all datasets and benchmark all clocks considered in this article.
References to our code and dataset repositories will become available after the double-blind review.
REFERENCES
Yosra Bejaoui, Aleem Razzaq, Noha A Yousri, Junko Oshima, Andre Megarbane, Abeer Qannan, Ramya
Potabattula, Tanvir Alam, George M Martin, Henning F Horn, Thomas Haaf, Steve Horvath, and Nady
El Hajj. DNA methylation signatures in blood DNA of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Aging Cell,
21(2):e13555, February 2022.
Jeremy M Bingen, Lindsay V Clark, Mark R Band, Ilyas Munzir, and Michael D Carrithers. Differential DNA
methylation associated with multiple sclerosis and disease modifying treatments in an underrepresented
minority population. Front. Genet., 13:1058817, 2022.
Maria Pia Campagna, Alexandre Xavier, Jeannette Lechner-Scott, Vicky Maltby, Rodney J Scott, Helmut
Butzkueven, Vilija G Jokubaitis, and Rodney A Lea. Epigenome-wide association studies: current knowl-
edge, strategies and recommendations. Clinical epigenetics, 13:1–24, 2021.
10
</conclusion>

<reproducibility_statement>
# Reproducibility statement

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
covering 19 putative aging-accelerating conditions. Notably, no aging-decelerating conditions
have been confirmed for the benchmark study (see Appendix A.5). It should be taken into account
that in vitro cell reprogramming cannot serve as validation data for the deceleration effect, because,
as has previously been shown (Kriukov et al., 2023), such data are essentially out-of-domain with
regard to blood DNA methylation across aging.
To showcase our benchmark, we tested 13 different published models and revealed that the second-
generation aging clocks, namely, PhenoAge (Levine et al., 2018), GrimAge (Lu et al., 2019), and
their upgraded variants (Higgins-Chen et al., 2022; Lu et al., 2022), were the most successful, ac-
cording to the cumulative benchmarking score. As these clocks had initially been designed to predict
all-cause mortality, they were expected to be robust in distinguishing aging-accelerating conditions.
Yet, our findings reinforce the growing trends in training BA predictors based on mortality rather
than chronological age (Yousefi et al., 2022; Moqri et al., 2024).
As blood DNA methylation generally comes from the immune cells, which would be directly af-
fected by the HIV, it is not surprising that the majority of clocks managed to discern accelerated
aging in the immune system-related conditions (featured predominantly by the HIV infection in our
dataset). This result supports the notion that the blood-based clocks might be implicitly attuned to
such conditions, while only a few clocks are capable of successfully capturing accelerated aging in
the other disease classes.
Remarkably, some datasets were evaluated incorrectly by all models, which may have several pos-
sible explanations apart from the poor clock performance. First, a strong covariate shift between
these data and the training data might impede model performance on some datasets. Second, some
selected conditions might not induce accelerated aging in blood, either by itself or by the design of
the original study (see Limitations in Appendix A.1). Third, the multidimensionality of aging as a
biological phenomenon might not allow for correct prediction of all aging-accelerating conditions
by such univariate measures as the blood-based epigenetic clocks. In favor of this notion, it has
recently been shown that different organ systems have different aging trajectories (Schaum et al.,
2020; Oh et al., 2023), suggesting several directions for the future research, outlined in Appendix
A.2.
6
CONCLUSION
In this work, we developed the first systematic benchmark for evaluating blood-based epigenetic
aging clocks. We believe it will help longevity researchers and data scientists to better gauge the
power of existing biomarkers of aging, quantitatively assessing their role, limitations, and reliability.
We anticipate that, as a result of such computational paradigm, rapid and reliable clinical trials of
lifespan-extending therapies will become an attainable reality in a not-so-distant future.
7
REPRODUCIBILITY STATEMENT
We assured the reproducibility of our pipeline by providing a Google Colab notebook (https://
colab.research.google.com/drive/1_nrGMUd8oH8ADNWUPNeXHr4ZAJlZOQhm),
which allows to download all datasets and benchmark all clocks considered in this article.
References to our code and dataset repositories will become available after the double-blind review.
REFERENCES
Yosra Bejaoui, Aleem Razzaq, Noha A Yousri, Junko Oshima, Andre Megarbane, Abeer Qannan, Ramya
Potabattula, Tanvir Alam, George M Martin, Henning F Horn, Thomas Haaf, Steve Horvath, and Nady
El Hajj. DNA methylation signatures in blood DNA of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Aging Cell,
21(2):e13555, February 2022.
Jeremy M Bingen, Lindsay V Clark, Mark R Band, Ilyas Munzir, and Michael D Carrithers. Differential DNA
methylation associated with multiple sclerosis and disease modifying treatments in an underrepresented
minority population. Front. Genet., 13:1058817, 2022.
Maria Pia Campagna, Alexandre Xavier, Jeannette Lechner-Scott, Vicky Maltby, Rodney J Scott, Helmut
Butzkueven, Vilija G Jokubaitis, and Rodney A Lea. Epigenome-wide association studies: current knowl-
edge, strategies and recommendations. Clinical epigenetics, 13:1–24, 2021.
10

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Karl E Carlstr¨om, Ewoud Ewing, Mathias Granqvist, Alexandra Gyllenberg, Shahin Aeinehband, Sara Lind
Enoksson, Antonio Checa, Tejaswi V S Badam, Jesse Huang, David Gomez-Cabrero, Mika Gustafsson,
Faiez Al Nimer, Craig E Wheelock, Ingrid Kockum, Tomas Olsson, Maja Jagodic, and Fredrik Piehl. Ther-
apeutic efficacy of dimethyl fumarate in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis associates with ROS pathway
in monocytes. Nat. Commun., 10(1):3081, July 2019.
Kamilah Castro, Achilles Ntranos, Mario Amatruda, Maria Petracca, Peter Kosa, Emily Y Chen, Johannes
Morstein, Dirk Trauner, Corey T Watson, Michael A Kiebish, Bibiana Bielekova, Matilde Inglese, Ilana
Katz Sand, and Patrizia Casaccia. Body mass index in multiple sclerosis modulates ceramide-induced DNA
methylation and disease course. EBioMedicine, 43:392–410, May 2019.
Yulan Chen, Qiao Wang, Haina Liu, Lei Jin, Xin Feng, Bingbing Dai, Meng Chen, Fangran Xin, Tingting Wei,
Bingqing Bai, Zhijun Fan, Jiahui Li, Yuxin Yao, Ruobing Liao, Jintao Zhang, Xiangnan Jin, and Lingyu
Fu. The prognostic value of whole-genome DNA methylation in response to leflunomide in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. Front. Immunol., 14:1173187, September 2023.
Yung-Che Chen, Chang-Chun Hsiao, Ting-Wen Chen, Chao-Chien Wu, Tung-Ying Chao, Sum-Yee Leung,
Hock-Liew Eng, Chiu-Ping Lee, Ting-Ya Wang, and Meng-Chih Lin.
Whole genome DNA methy-
lation analysis of active pulmonary tuberculosis disease identifies novel epigenotypes:
PARP9/miR-
505/RASGRP4/GNG12 gene methylation and clinical phenotypes. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 21(9):3180, April 2020.
Yung-Che Chen, Ying-Huang Tsai, Chin-Chou Wang, Shih-Feng Liu, Ting-Wen Chen, Wen-Feng Fang, Chiu-
Ping Lee, Po-Yuan Hsu, Tung-Ying Chao, Chao-Chien Wu, Yu-Feng Wei, Huang-Chih Chang, Chia-
Cheng Tsen, Yu-Ping Chang, Meng-Chih Lin, and Taiwan Clinical Trial Consortium of Respiratory Disease
(TCORE) group. Epigenome-wide association study on asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
overlap reveals aberrant DNA methylations related to clinical phenotypes. Sci. Rep., 11(1):5022, March
2021.
Olga Chervova, Elizabeth Chernysheva, Kseniia Panteleeva, Tyas Arum Widayati, Natalie Hrbkova, Jadesada
Schneider, Vladimir Maximov, Andrew Ryabikov, Taavi Tillmann, Hynek Pikhart, et al.
Evaluation of
epigenetic age acceleration scores and their associations with cvd-related phenotypes in a population cohort.
Biology, 12(1):68, 2022.
Yu-Hsuan Chuang, Kimberly C Paul, Jeff M Bronstein, Yvette Bordelon, Steve Horvath, and Beate Ritz.
Parkinson’s disease is associated with DNA methylation levels in human blood and saliva. Genome Med., 9
(1):76, August 2017.
Yu-Hsuan Chuang, Ake T Lu, Kimberly C Paul, Aline D Folle, Jeff M Bronstein, Yvette Bordelon, Steve
Horvath, and Beate Ritz. Longitudinal epigenome-wide methylation study of cognitive decline and motor
progression in parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinsons. Dis., 9(2):389–400, 2019.
Alexander D Clark, Nisha Nair, Amy E Anderson, Nishanthi Thalayasingam, Najib Naamane, Andrew J Skel-
ton, Julie Diboll, Anne Barton, Stephen Eyre, John D Isaacs, Arthur G Pratt, and Louise N Reynard. Lym-
phocyte DNA methylation mediates genetic risk at shared immune-mediated disease loci. J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol., 145(5):1438–1451, May 2020.
Natalia Cullell, Carolina Soriano-T´arraga, Cristina Gallego-F´abrega, Jara C´arcel-M´arquez, Elena Mui˜no, Laia
Lluci`a-Carol, Miquel Lled´os, Manel Esteller, Manuel Castro de Moura, Joan Montaner, Anna Rosell, Pilar
Delgado, Joan Mart´ı-F´abregas, Jerzy Krupinski, Jaume Roquer, Jordi Jim´enez-Conde, and Israel Fern´andez-
Cadenas. Altered methylation pattern in EXOC4 is associated with stroke outcome: an epigenome-wide
association study. Clin. Epigenetics, 14(1):124, September 2022.
Luke C Dabin, Fernando Guntoro, Tracy Campbell, Tony B´elicard, Adam R Smith, Rebecca G Smith, Rachel
Raybould, Jonathan M Schott, Katie Lunnon, Peter Sarkies, John Collinge, Simon Mead, and Emmanuelle
Vir´e. Altered DNA methylation profiles in blood from patients with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Acta Neuropathol., 140(6):863–879, December 2020.
Kenneth Day, Lindsay L Waite, Anna Thalacker-Mercer, Andrew West, Marcas M Bamman, James D Brooks,
Richard M Myers, and Devin Absher. Differential DNA methylation with age displays both common and
dynamic features across human tissues that are influenced by CpG landscape. Genome Biol., 14(9):R102,
2013.
Carlos de la Calle-Fabregat, Ellis Niemantsverdriet, Juan D Ca˜nete, Tianlu Li, Annette H M van der Helm-
van Mil, Javier Rodr´ıguez-Ubreva, and Esteban Ballestar. Prediction of the progression of undifferentiated
arthritis to rheumatoid arthritis using DNA methylation profiling. Arthritis Rheumatol., 73(12):2229–2239,
December 2021.
11

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Lucas Paulo de Lima Camillo. pyaging: a python-based compendium of gpu-optimized aging clocks. Bioin-
formatics, pp. btae200, 2024.
Andrew R DiNardo, Kimal Rajapakshe, Tomoki Nishiguchi, Sandra L Grimm, Godwin Mtetwa, Qiniso
Dlamini, Jaqueline Kahari, Sanjana Mahapatra, Alexander Kay, Gugu Maphalala, Emily M Mace, George
Makedonas, Jeffrey D Cirillo, Mihai G Netea, Reinout van Crevel, Cristian Coarfa, and Anna M Mandalakas.
DNA hypermethylation during tuberculosis dampens host immune responsiveness. J. Clin. Invest., 130(6):
3113–3123, June 2020.
Ravindranath Duggirala, Meredith Uttley, Ken Williams, Rector Arya, John Blangero, and Michael H Craw-
ford. Genetic determination of biological age in the mennonites of the midwestern united states. Genetic
Epidemiology: The Official Publication of the International Genetic Epidemiology Society, 23(2):97–109,
2002.
Andr´es Esteban-Cantos, Javier Rodr´ıguez-Centeno, Juan C Silla, Pilar Barruz, F´atima S´anchez-Cabo,
Gabriel Saiz-Medrano, Juli´an Nevado, Beatriz Mena-Garay, Mar´ıa Jim´enez-Gonz´alez, Rosa de Miguel,
Jose I Bernardino, Roc´ıo Montejano, Julen Cadi˜nanos, Cristina Marcelo, Luc´ıa Guti´errez-Garc´ıa, Patri-
cia Mart´ınez-Mart´ın, C´edrick Wallet, Franc¸ois Raffi, Berta Rod´es, Jos´e R Arribas, and NEAT001/ANRS143
study group. Effect of HIV infection and antiretroviral therapy initiation on genome-wide DNA methylation
patterns. EBioMedicine, 88(104434):104434, February 2023.
Maria M Esterhuyse, January Weiner, 3rd, Etienne Caron, Andre G Loxton, Marco Iannaccone, Chandre Wag-
man, Philippe Saikali, Kim Stanley, Witold E Wolski, Hans-Joachim Mollenkopf, Matthias Schick, Ruedi
Aebersold, Heinz Linhart, Gerhard Walzl, and Stefan H E Kaufmann. Epigenetics and proteomics join
transcriptomics in the quest for tuberculosis biomarkers. MBio, 6(5):e01187–15, September 2015.
Ewoud Ewing, Lara Kular, Sunjay J Fernandes, Nestoras Karathanasis, Vincenzo Lagani, Sabrina Ruhrmann,
Ioannis Tsamardinos, Jesper Tegner, Fredrik Piehl, David Gomez-Cabrero, and Maja Jagodic. Combin-
ing evidence from four immune cell types identifies DNA methylation patterns that implicate functionally
distinct pathways during multiple sclerosis progression. EBioMedicine, 43:411–423, May 2019.
Eduardo Fernandez-Rebollo, Monika Eipel, Lothar Seefried, Per Hoffmann, Klaus Strathmann, Franz Jakob,
and Wolfgang Wagner. Primary osteoporosis is not reflected by disease-specific DNA methylation or accel-
erated epigenetic age in blood. J. Bone Miner. Res., 33(2):356–361, February 2018.
Alize J Ferrari, Damian Francesco Santomauro, Amirali Aali, Yohannes Habtegiorgis Abate, Cristiana Ab-
bafati, Hedayat Abbastabar, Samar Abd ElHafeez, Michael Abdelmasseh, Sherief Abd-Elsalam, Arash Ab-
dollahi, et al. Global incidence, prevalence, years lived with disability (ylds), disability-adjusted life-years
(dalys), and healthy life expectancy (hale) for 371 diseases and injuries in 204 countries and territories and
811 subnational locations, 1990–2021: a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2021.
The Lancet, 403(10440):2133–2161, 2024.
Fedor Galkin, Polina Mamoshina, Kirill Kochetov, Denis Sidorenko, and Alex Zhavoronkov. Deepmage: a
methylation aging clock developed with deep learning. Aging and disease, 12(5):1252, 2021.
Rodney C P Go, Michael J Corley, G Webster Ross, Helen Petrovitch, Kamal H Masaki, Alika K Maunakea,
Qimei He, and Maarit I Tiirikainen. Genome-wide epigenetic analyses in japanese immigrant plantation
workers with parkinson’s disease and exposure to organochlorines reveal possible involvement of glial genes
and pathways involved in neurotoxicity. BMC Neurosci., 21(1):31, July 2020.
Maxim VC Greenberg and Deborah Bourc’his. The diverse roles of dna methylation in mammalian develop-
ment and disease. Nature reviews Molecular cell biology, 20(10):590–607, 2019.
Andrew M Gross, Philipp A Jaeger, Jason F Kreisberg, Katherine Licon, Kristen L Jepsen, Mahdieh Khosro-
heidari, Brenda M Morsey, Susan Swindells, Hui Shen, Cherie T Ng, Ken Flagg, Daniel Chen, Kang Zhang,
Howard S Fox, and Trey Ideker. Methylome-wide analysis of chronic HIV infection reveals five-year in-
crease in biological age and epigenetic targeting of HLA. Mol. Cell, 62(2):157–168, April 2016.
Gregory Hannum, Justin Guinney, Ling Zhao, LI Zhang, Guy Hughes, SriniVas Sadda, Brandy Klotzle, Marina
Bibikova, Jian-Bing Fan, Yuan Gao, et al. Genome-wide methylation profiles reveal quantitative views of
human aging rates. Molecular cell, 49(2):359–367, 2013.
R Alan Harris, Dorottya Nagy-Szakal, Natalia Pedersen, Antone Opekun, Jiri Bronsky, Pia Munkholm,
Cathrine Jespersgaard, Paalskytt Andersen, Bela Melegh, George Ferry, Tine Jess, and Richard Kellermayer.
Genome-wide peripheral blood leukocyte DNA methylation microarrays identified a single association with
inflammatory bowel diseases. Inflamm. Bowel Dis., 18(12):2334–2341, December 2012.
12

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Johannes Hertel, Nele Friedrich, Katharina Wittfeld, Maik Pietzner, Kathrin Budde, Sandra Van der Auwera,
Tobias Lohmann, Alexander Teumer, Henry Voolzke, Matthias Nauck, et al. Measuring biological age via
metabonomics: the metabolic age score. Journal of proteome research, 15(2):400–410, 2016.
Albert T Higgins-Chen, Kyra L Thrush, Yunzhang Wang, Christopher J Minteer, Pei-Lun Kuo, Meng Wang,
Peter Niimi, Gabriel Sturm, Jue Lin, Ann Zenobia Moore, et al. A computational solution for bolstering
reliability of epigenetic clocks: Implications for clinical trials and longitudinal tracking. Nature aging, 2(7):
644–661, 2022.
Richard Hochschild. Improving the precision of biological age determinations. part 1: a new approach to
calculating biological age. Experimental gerontology, 24(4):289–300, 1989.
James William Hollingsworth, Asaji Hashizume, and Seymour Jablon. Correlations between tests of aging in
hiroshima subjects–an attempt to define” physiologic age”. The Yale journal of biology and medicine, 38(1):
11, 1965.
Nicholas Holzscheck, Cassandra Falckenhayn, J¨orn S¨ohle, Boris Kristof, Ralf Siegner, Andr´e Werner, Janka
Sch¨ossow, Clemens J¨urgens, Henry V¨olzke, Horst Wenck, et al.
Modeling transcriptomic age using
knowledge-primed artificial neural networks. npj Aging and Mechanisms of Disease, 7(1):15, 2021.
Steve Horvath. Dna methylation age of human tissues and cell types. Genome biology, 14:1–20, 2013.
Steve Horvath and Andrew J Levine. HIV-1 infection accelerates age according to the epigenetic clock. J.
Infect. Dis., 212(10):1563–1573, November 2015.
Steve Horvath and Beate R Ritz. Increased epigenetic age and granulocyte counts in the blood of parkinson’s
disease patients. Aging (Albany NY), 7(12):1130–1142, December 2015.
Steve Horvath, Junko Oshima, George M Martin, Ake T Lu, Austin Quach, Howard Cohen, Sarah Felton,
Mieko Matsuyama, Donna Lowe, Sylwia Kabacik, et al. Epigenetic clock for skin and blood cells applied
to hutchinson gilford progeria syndrome and ex vivo studies. Aging (Albany NY), 10(7):1758, 2018.
Tianxiao Huan, Steve Nguyen, Elena Colicino, Carolina Ochoa-Rosales, W David Hill, Jennifer A Brody,
Mette Soerensen, Yan Zhang, Antoine Baldassari, Mohamed Ahmed Elhadad, et al. Integrative analysis of
clinical and epigenetic biomarkers of mortality. Aging cell, 21(6):e13608, 2022.
Geoffrey Istas, Ken Declerck, Maria Pudenz, Katarzyna Szarc Vel Szic, Veronica Lendinez-Tortajada, Montser-
rat Leon-Latre, Karen Heyninck, Guy Haegeman, Jose A Casasnovas, Maria Tellez-Plaza, Clarissa Ger-
hauser, Christian Heiss, Ana Rodriguez-Mateos, and Wim Vanden Berghe. Identification of differentially
methylated BRCA1 and CRISP2 DNA regions as blood surrogate markers for cardiovascular disease. Sci.
Rep., 7(1):5120, July 2017.
Antonio Juli`a, Antonio G´omez, Mar´ıa L´opez-Lasanta, Francisco Blanco, Alba Erra, Antonio Fern´andez-Nebro,
Antonio Juan Mas, Carolina P´erez-Garc´ıa, Ma Luz Garc´ıa Vivar, Sim´on S´anchez-Fern´andez, Mercedes
Alperi-L´opez, Raimon Sanmart´ı, Ana Mar´ıa Ortiz, Carlos Marras Fernandez-Cid, C´esar D´ıaz-Torn´e, Estefa-
nia Moreno, Tianlu Li, Sergio H Mart´ınez-Mateu, Devin M Absher, Richard M Myers, Jes´us Tornero Molina,
and Sara Marsal. Longitudinal analysis of blood DNA methylation identifies mechanisms of response to tu-
mor necrosis factor inhibitor therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. EBioMedicine, 80(104053):104053, June 2022.
Jamie N Justice, Laura Niedernhofer, Paul D Robbins, Vanita R Aroda, Mark A Espeland, Stephen B
Kritchevsky, George A Kuchel, and Nir Barzilai. Development of clinical trials to extend healthy lifespan.
Cardiovascular endocrinology & metabolism, 7(4):80–83, 2018.
Juulia Jylh¨av¨a, Nancy L Pedersen, and Sara H¨agg. Biological age predictors. EBioMedicine, 21:29–36, 2017.
Petr Klemera and Stanislav Doubal. A new approach to the concept and computation of biological age. Mech-
anisms of ageing and development, 127(3):240–248, 2006.
Dmitrii Kriukov, Ekaterina Kuzmina, Evgeniy Efimov, Dmitry V Dylov, and Ekaterina E Khrameeva. Epistemic
uncertainty challenges aging clock reliability in predicting rejuvenation effects. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–12, 2023.
Lieke M Kuiper, Harmke A Polinder-Bos, Daniele Bizzarri, Dina Vojinovic, Costanza L Vallerga, Marian
Beekman, Martijn ET Doll´e, Mohsen Ghanbari, Trudy Voortman, Marcel JT Reinders, et al. Epigenetic
and metabolomic biomarkers for biological age: a comparative analysis of mortality and frailty risk. The
Journals of Gerontology: Series A, 78(10):1753–1762, 2023.
13

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Lara Kular, Yun Liu, Sabrina Ruhrmann, Galina Zheleznyakova, Francesco Marabita, David Gomez-Cabrero,
Tojo James, Ewoud Ewing, Magdalena Lind´en, Bartosz G´ornikiewicz, Shahin Aeinehband, Pernilla Stridh,
Jenny Link, Till F M Andlauer, Christiane Gasperi, Heinz Wiendl, Frauke Zipp, Ralf Gold, Bj¨orn Tacken-
berg, Frank Weber, Bernhard Hemmer, Konstantin Strauch, Stefanie Heilmann-Heimbach, Rajesh Rawal,
Ulf Schminke, Carsten O Schmidt, Tim Kacprowski, Andre Franke, Matthias Laudes, Alexander T Dilthey,
Elisabeth G Celius, Helle B Søndergaard, Jesper Tegn´er, Hanne F Harbo, Annette B Oturai, Sigurgeir Olafs-
son, Hannes P Eggertsson, Bjarni V Halldorsson, Haukur Hjaltason, Elias Olafsson, Ingileif Jonsdottir, Kari
Stefansson, Tomas Olsson, Fredrik Piehl, Tomas J Ekstr¨om, Ingrid Kockum, Andrew P Feinberg, and Maja
Jagodic. DNA methylation as a mediator of HLA-DRB1*15:01 and a protective variant in multiple sclerosis.
Nat. Commun., 9(1):2397, June 2018.
Morgan E Levine, Ake T Lu, Austin Quach, Brian H Chen, Themistocles L Assimes, Stefania Bandinelli,
Lifang Hou, Andrea A Baccarelli, James D Stewart, Yun Li, et al. An epigenetic biomarker of aging for
lifespan and healthspan. Aging (albany NY), 10(4):573, 2018.
Zhe Li, Zhenkun Zhang, Yikun Ren, Yingying Wang, Jiarui Fang, Han Yue, Shanshan Ma, and Fangxia Guan.
Aging and age-related diseases: from mechanisms to therapeutic strategies. Biogerontology, 22(2):165–187,
2021.
Andrew Y F Li Yim, Nicolette W Duijvis, Jing Zhao, Wouter J de Jonge, Geert R A M D’Haens, Marcel M
A M Mannens, Adri N P M Mul, Anje A Te Velde, and Peter Henneman. Peripheral blood methylation
profiling of female crohn’s disease patients. Clin. Epigenetics, 8(1):65, June 2016.
Qiong Lin, Carola I Weidner, Ivan G Costa, Riccardo E Marioni, Marcelo RP Ferreira, Ian J Deary, and Wolf-
gang Wagner. Dna methylation levels at individual age-associated cpg sites can be indicative for life ex-
pectancy. Aging (Albany NY), 8(2):394, 2016.
Yun Liu, Martin J Aryee, Leonid Padyukov, M Daniele Fallin, Espen Hesselberg, Arni Runarsson, Lovisa
Reinius, Nathalie Acevedo, Margaret Taub, Marcus Ronninger, Klementy Shchetynsky, Annika Scheynius,
Juha Kere, Lars Alfredsson, Lars Klareskog, Tomas J Ekstr¨om, and Andrew P Feinberg. Epigenome-wide
association data implicate DNA methylation as an intermediary of genetic risk in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat.
Biotechnol., 31(2):142–147, February 2013.
Zuyun Liu, Diana Leung, Kyra Thrush, Wei Zhao, Scott Ratliff, Toshiko Tanaka, Lauren L Schmitz, Jennifer A
Smith, Luigi Ferrucci, and Morgan E Levine. Underlying features of epigenetic aging clocks in vivo and in
vitro. Aging cell, 19(10):e13229, 2020.
Ake T Lu, Austin Quach, James G Wilson, Alex P Reiner, Abraham Aviv, Kenneth Raj, Lifang Hou, An-
drea A Baccarelli, Yun Li, James D Stewart, et al. Dna methylation grimage strongly predicts lifespan and
healthspan. Aging (albany NY), 11(2):303, 2019.
Ake T Lu, Alexandra M Binder, Joshua Zhang, Qi Yan, Alex P Reiner, Simon R Cox, Janie Corley, Sarah E
Harris, Pei-Lun Kuo, Ann Z Moore, et al. Dna methylation grimage version 2. Aging (Albany NY), 14(23):
9484, 2022.
Katie Lunnon, Rebecca Smith, Eilis Hannon, Philip L De Jager, Gyan Srivastava, Manuela Volta, Claire
Troakes, Safa Al-Sarraj, Joe Burrage, Ruby Macdonald, Daniel Condliffe, Lorna W Harries, Pavel Kat-
sel, Vahram Haroutunian, Zachary Kaminsky, Catharine Joachim, John Powell, Simon Lovestone, David A
Bennett, Leonard C Schalkwyk, and Jonathan Mill. Methylomic profiling implicates cortical deregulation
of ANK1 in alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci., 17(9):1164–1170, September 2014.
Katie Lunnon, Rebecca G Smith, Itzik Cooper, Lior Greenbaum, Jonathan Mill, and Michal Schnaider Beeri.
Blood methylomic signatures of presymptomatic dementia in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Neurobiol. Aging, 36(3):1600.e1–4, March 2015.
Jane Maddock, Juan Castillo-Fernandez, Andrew Wong, Rachel Cooper, Marcus Richards, Ken K Ong,
George B Ploubidis, Alissa Goodman, Diana Kuh, Jordana T Bell, et al. Dna methylation age and phys-
ical and cognitive aging. The Journals of Gerontology: Series A, 75(3):504–511, 2020.
Anna Maierhofer, Julia Flunkert, Junko Oshima, George M Martin, Martin Poot, Indrajit Nanda, Marcus Dit-
trich, Tobias M¨uller, and Thomas Haaf. Epigenetic signatures of werner syndrome occur early in life and
are distinct from normal epigenetic aging processes. Aging Cell, 18(5):e12995, October 2019.
Francesco Marabita, Malin Almgren, Mal´ene E Lindholm, Sabrina Ruhrmann, Fredrik Fagerstr¨om-Billai, Maja
Jagodic, Carl J Sundberg, Tomas J Ekstr¨om, Andrew E Teschendorff, Jesper Tegn´er, and David Gomez-
Cabrero. An evaluation of analysis pipelines for DNA methylation profiling using the illumina Human-
Methylation450 BeadChip platform. Epigenetics, 8(3):333–346, March 2013.
14

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Cathal McCrory, Giovanni Fiorito, Belinda Hernandez, Silvia Polidoro, Aisling M O’Halloran, Ann Hever,
Cliona Ni Cheallaigh, Ake T Lu, Steve Horvath, Paolo Vineis, et al. Grimage outperforms other epige-
netic clocks in the prediction of age-related clinical phenotypes and all-cause mortality. The Journals of
Gerontology: Series A, 76(5):741–749, 2021.
Xiaoyue Mei, Joshua Blanchard, Connor Luellen, Michael J Conboy, and Irina M Conboy. Fail-tests of dna
methylation clocks, and development of a noise barometer for measuring epigenetic pressure of aging and
disease. Aging (Albany NY), 15(17):8552, 2023.
Mahdi Moqri, Chiara Herzog, Jesse R Poganik, Kejun Ying, Jamie N Justice, Daniel W Belsky, Albert T
Higgins-Chen, Brian H Chen, Alan A Cohen, Georg Fuellen, et al. Validation of biomarkers of aging.
Nature Medicine, pp. 1–13, 2024.
Alexey Moskalev. Biomarkers of human aging, volume 10. Springer, 2019.
Maria S Nazarenko, Anton V Markov, Igor N Lebedev, Maxim B Freidin, Aleksei A Sleptcov, Iuliya A Korol-
eva, Aleksei V Frolov, Vadim A Popov, Olga L Barbarash, and Valery P Puzyrev. A comparison of genome-
wide DNA methylation patterns between different vascular tissues from patients with coronary heart disease.
PLoS One, 10(4):e0122601, April 2015.
Nat´alia Yumi Noronha,
Mariana Barato,
Chanachai Sae-Lee,
Marcela Augusta de Souza Pinhel,
L´ıgia Moriguchi Watanabe,
Vanessa Aparecida Batista Pereira,
Guilherme da Silva Rodrigues,
D´eborah Ara´ujo Morais, Wellington Tavares de Sousa, Jr, Vanessa Cristina de Oliveira Souza, Jessica Ro-
drigues Plac¸a, Wilson Salgado, Jr, Fernando Barbosa, Jr, Torsten Pl¨osch, and Carla Barbosa Nonino. Novel
zinc-related differentially methylated regions in leukocytes of women with and without obesity. Front. Nutr.,
9:785281, March 2022.
Achilles Ntranos, Vasilis Ntranos, Valentina Bonnefil, Jia Liu, Seunghee Kim-Schulze, Ye He, Yunjiao Zhu,
Rachel Brandstadter, Corey T Watson, Andrew J Sharp, Ilana Katz Sand, and Patrizia Casaccia. Fumarates
target the metabolic-epigenetic interplay of brain-homing T cells in multiple sclerosis. Brain, 142(3):647–
661, March 2019.
Hamilton Se-Hwee Oh, Jarod Rutledge, Daniel Nachun, R´obert P´alovics, Olamide Abiose, Patricia Moran-
Losada, Divya Channappa, Deniz Yagmur Urey, Kate Kim, Yun Ju Sung, et al. Organ aging signatures in
the plasma proteome track health and disease. Nature, 624(7990):164–172, 2023.
Bruna Oriol-Tordera, Maria Berdasco, Anuska Llano, Beatriz Mothe, Cristina G´alvez, Javier Martinez-Picado,
Jorge Carrillo, Juli`a Blanco, Clara Duran-Castells, Carmela Ganoza, Jorge Sanchez, Bonaventura Clotet,
Maria Luz Calle, Alex S´anchez-Pla, Manel Esteller, Christian Brander, and Marta Ruiz-Riol. Methylation
regulation of antiviral host factors, interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) and t-cell responses associated with
natural HIV control. PLoS Pathog., 16(8):e1008678, August 2020.
Bruna Oriol-Tordera, Anna Esteve-Codina, Mar´ıa Berdasco, M´ıriam Ros´as-Umbert, Elena Gonc¸alves, Clara
Duran-Castells, Francesc Catal`a-Moll, Anuska Llano, Samandhy Cede˜no, Maria C Puertas, Martin Tolstrup,
Ole S Søgaard, Bonaventura Clotet, Javier Mart´ınez-Picado, Tom´aˇs Hanke, Behazine Combadiere, Roger
Paredes, Dennis Hartigan-O’Connor, Manel Esteller, Michael Meulbroek, Mar´ıa Luz Calle, Alex Sanchez-
Pla, Jos´e Molt´o, Beatriz Mothe, Christian Brander, and Marta Ruiz-Riol. Epigenetic landscape in the kick-
and-kill therapeutic vaccine BCN02 clinical trial is associated with antiretroviral treatment interruption (ATI)
outcome. EBioMedicine, 78(103956):103956, April 2022.
Ersilia Paparazzo, Vincenzo Lagani, Silvana Geracitano, Luigi Citrigno, Mirella Aurora Aceto, Antonio Mal-
vaso, Francesco Bruno, Giuseppe Passarino, and Alberto Montesanto. An elovl2-based epigenetic clock
for forensic age prediction: a systematic review. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 24(3):2254,
2023.
Emma Pierson, Pang Wei Koh, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Daphne Koller, Jure Leskovec, Nick Eriksson, and Percy
Liang.
Inferring multidimensional rates of aging from cross-sectional data.
In The 22nd International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, pp. 97–107. PMLR, 2019.
Hunter L Porter, Chase A Brown, Xiavan Roopnarinesingh, Cory B Giles, Constantin Georgescu, Willard M
Freeman, and Jonathan D Wren. Many chronological aging clocks can be found throughout the epigenome:
Implications for quantifying biological aging. Aging cell, 20(11):e13492, 2021.
Aurel Prosz, Orsolya Pipek, Judit B¨orcs¨ok, Gergely Palla, Zoltan Szallasi, Sandor Spisak, and Istv´an Csabai.
Biologically informed deep learning for explainable epigenetic clocks. Scientific Reports, 14(1):1306, 2024.
Evgeny Putin, Polina Mamoshina, Alexander Aliper, Mikhail Korzinkin, Alexey Moskalev, Alexey Kolosov,
Alexander Ostrovskiy, Charles Cantor, Jan Vijg, and Alex Zhavoronkov. Deep biomarkers of human aging:
application of deep neural networks to biomarker development. Aging (Albany NY), 8(5):1021, 2016.
15

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Abeer Qannan, Yosra Bejaoui, Mahmoud Izadi, Noha A Yousri, Aleem Razzaq, Colette Christiansen, George M
Martin, Jordana T Bell, Steve Horvath, Junko Oshima, Andre Megarbane, Johan Ericsson, Ehsan Pourkarimi,
and Nady El Hajj. Accelerated epigenetic aging and DNA methylation alterations in Berardinelli-Seip con-
genital lipodystrophy. Hum. Mol. Genet., 32(11):1826–1835, May 2023.
Vardhman K Rakyan, Huriya Beyan, Thomas A Down, Mohammed I Hawa, Siarhei Maslau, Deeqo Aden,
Antoine Daunay, Florence Busato, Charles A Mein, Burkhard Manfras, Kerith-Rae M Dias, Christopher G
Bell, J¨org Tost, Bernhard O Boehm, Stephan Beck, and R David Leslie. Identification of type 1 diabetes-
associated DNA methylation variable positions that precede disease diagnosis. PLoS Genet., 7(9):e1002300,
September 2011.
Bruno Ramos-Molina, Lidia S´anchez-Alcoholado, Amanda Cabrera-Mulero, Raul Lopez-Dominguez, Pedro
Carmona-Saez, Eduardo Garcia-Fuentes, Isabel Moreno-Indias, and Francisco J Tinahones. Gut microbiota
composition is associated with the global DNA methylation pattern in obesity. Front. Genet., 10:613, July
2019.
Lindsay M Reynolds, Jackson R Taylor, Jingzhong Ding, Kurt Lohman, Craig Johnson, David Siscovick, Gre-
gory Burke, Wendy Post, Steven Shea, David R Jacobs, Jr, Hendrik Stunnenberg, Stephen B Kritchevsky, Ina
Hoeschele, Charles E McCall, David Herrington, Russell P Tracy, and Yongmei Liu. Age-related variations
in the methylome associated with gene expression in human monocytes and T cells. Nat. Commun., 5(1):
5366, November 2014.
Brooke Rhead, Calliope Holingue, Michael Cole, Xiaorong Shao, Hong L Quach, Diana Quach, Khooshbu
Shah, Elizabeth Sinclair, John Graf, Thomas Link, Ruby Harrison, Elior Rahmani, Eran Halperin, Wei
Wang, Gary S Firestein, Lisa F Barcellos, and Lindsey A Criswell. Rheumatoid arthritis naive T cells share
hypermethylation sites with synoviocytes. Arthritis Rheumatol., 69(3):550–559, March 2017.
Janou A Y Roubroeks, Adam R Smith, Rebecca G Smith, Ehsan Pishva, Zina Ibrahim, Martina Sattlecker,
Eilis J Hannon, Iwona Kłoszewska, Patrizia Mecocci, Hilkka Soininen, Magda Tsolaki, Bruno Vellas, Lars-
Olof Wahlund, Dag Aarsland, Petroula Proitsi, Angela Hodges, Simon Lovestone, Stephen J Newhouse,
Richard J B Dobson, Jonathan Mill, Dani¨el L A van den Hove, and Katie Lunnon. An epigenome-wide
association study of alzheimer’s disease blood highlights robust DNA hypermethylation in the HOXB6 gene.
Neurobiol. Aging, 95:26–45, November 2020.
Jarod Rutledge, Hamilton Oh, and Tony Wyss-Coray. Measuring biological age using omics data. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 23(12):715–727, 2022.
Nicholas Schaum, Benoit Lehallier, Oliver Hahn, R´obert P´alovics, Shayan Hosseinzadeh, Song E Lee, Rene
Sit, Davis P Lee, Patricia Mor´an Losada, Macy E Zardeneta, et al. Ageing hallmarks exhibit organ-specific
temporal signatures. Nature, 583(7817):596–602, 2020.
Franziska Schnabel, Uwe Kornak, and Bernd Wollnik. Premature aging disorders: A clinical and genetic
compendium. Clinical Genetics, 99(1):3–28, 2021.
Nicholas J Schork, Brett Beaulieu-Jones, Winnie Liang, Susan Smalley, and Laura H Goetz. Does modulation
of an epigenetic clock define a geroprotector? Advances in geriatric medicine and research, 4(1), 2022.
Kirsten Seale, Steve Horvath, Andrew Teschendorff, Nir Eynon, and Sarah Voisin. Making sense of the ageing
methylome. Nature Reviews Genetics, 23(10):585–605, 2022.
Marije H Sluiskes, Jelle J Goeman, Marian Beekman, P Eline Slagboom, Hein Putter, and Mar Rodr´ıguez-
Girondo. Clarifying the biological and statistical assumptions of cross-sectional biological age predictors:
an elaborate illustration using synthetic and real data. BMC Medical Research Methodology, 24(1):58, 2024.
Carolina Soriano-T´arraga, Jordi Jim´enez-Conde, Eva Giralt-Steinhauer, Marina Mola-Caminal, Rosa M
Vivanco-Hidalgo, Angel Ois, Ana Rodr´ıguez-Campello, Elisa Cuadrado-Godia, Sergi Sayols-Baixeras,
Roberto Elosua, Jaume Roquer, and GENESTROKE Consortium. Epigenome-wide association study iden-
tifies TXNIP gene associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus and sustained hyperglycemia. Hum. Mol. Genet.,
25(3):609–619, February 2016.
Weiyang Tao, Arno N Concepcion, Marieke Vianen, Anne C A Marijnissen, Floris P G J Lafeber, Timothy R
D J Radstake, and Aridaman Pandit. Multiomics and machine learning accurately predict clinical response
to adalimumab and etanercept therapy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol., 73(2):
212–222, February 2021.
Anatoly Urban, Denis Sidorenko, Diana Zagirova, Ekaterina Kozlova, Aleksandr Kalashnikov, Stefan Pushkov,
Vladimir Naumov, Viktoria Sarkisova, Geoffrey Ho Duen Leung, Hoi Wing Leung, et al. Precious1gpt:
multimodal transformer-based transfer learning for aging clock development and feature importance analysis
for aging and age-related disease target discovery. Aging (Albany NY), 15(11):4649, 2023.
16

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Miri Varshavsky, Gil Harari, Benjamin Glaser, Yuval Dor, Ruth Shemer, and Tommy Kaplan. Accurate age pre-
diction from blood using a small set of dna methylation sites and a cohort-based machine learning algorithm.
Cell Reports Methods, 3(9), 2023.
N T Ventham, N A Kennedy, A T Adams, R Kalla, S Heath, K R O’Leary, H Drummond, IBD BIOM con-
sortium, IBD CHARACTER consortium, D C Wilson, I G Gut, E R Nimmo, and J Satsangi. Integrative
epigenome-wide analysis demonstrates that DNA methylation may mediate genetic risk in inflammatory
bowel disease. Nat. Commun., 7:13507, November 2016.
Laura Vidal-Bralo, Yolanda Lopez-Golan, and Antonio Gonzalez. Simplified assay for epigenetic age estima-
tion in whole blood of adults. Frontiers in genetics, 7:126, 2016.
VP Voitenko and AV Tokar. The assessment of biological age and sex differences of human aging. Experimental
Aging Research, 9(4):239–244, 1983.
Cuicui Wang, Wenli Ni, Yueli Yao, Allan Just, Jonathan Heiss, Yaguang Wei, Xu Gao, Brent A Coull, Anna
Kosheleva, Andrea A Baccarelli, et al. Dna methylation-based biomarkers of age acceleration and all-cause
death, myocardial infarction, stroke, and cancer in two cohorts: the nas, and kora f4. EBioMedicine, 63,
2021.
Xian Xia, Xingwei Chen, Gang Wu, Fang Li, Yiyang Wang, Yang Chen, Mingxu Chen, Xinyu Wang, Weiyang
Chen, Bo Xian, et al. Three-dimensional facial-image analysis to predict heterogeneity of the human ageing
rate and the impact of lifestyle. Nature metabolism, 2(9):946–957, 2020.
Xian Xia, Yiyang Wang, Zhengqing Yu, Jiawei Chen, and Jing-Dong J Han. Assessing the rate of aging to
monitor aging itself. Ageing Research Reviews, 69:101350, 2021.
Kejun Ying, Seth Paulson, Alec Eames, Alexander Tyshkovskiy, Siyuan Li, Martin Perez-Guevara, Mehrnoosh
Emamifar, Maximiliano Casas Mart´ınez, Dayoon Kwon, Anna Kosheleva, et al. A unified framework for
systematic curation and evaluation of aging biomarkers. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–12, 2023.
Kejun Ying, Hanna Liu, Andrei E Tarkhov, Marie C Sadler, Ake T Lu, Mahdi Moqri, Steve Horvath, Zolt´an
Kutalik, Xia Shen, and Vadim N Gladyshev.
Causality-enriched epigenetic age uncouples damage and
adaptation. Nature Aging, pp. 1–16, 2024.
Paul D Yousefi, Matthew Suderman, Ryan Langdon, Oliver Whitehurst, George Davey Smith, and Caroline L
Relton. Dna methylation-based predictors of health: applications and statistical considerations. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 23(6):369–383, 2022.
Qian Zhang, Costanza L Vallerga, Rosie M Walker, Tian Lin, Anjali K Henders, Grant W Montgomery, Ji He,
Dongsheng Fan, Javed Fowdar, Martin Kennedy, et al. Improved precision of epigenetic clock estimates
across tissues and its implication for biological ageing. Genome medicine, 11:1–11, 2019.
Xinyu Zhang, Amy C Justice, Ying Hu, Zuoheng Wang, Hongyu Zhao, Guilin Wang, Eric O Johnson, Brinda
Emu, Richard E Sutton, John H Krystal, and Ke Xu. Epigenome-wide differential DNA methylation between
HIV-infected and uninfected individuals. Epigenetics, 11(10):750–760, October 2016.
Xinyu Zhang, Ying Hu, Amy C Justice, Boyang Li, Zuoheng Wang, Hongyu Zhao, John H Krystal, and Ke Xu.
DNA methylation signatures of illicit drug injection and hepatitis C are associated with HIV frailty. Nat.
Commun., 8(1):2243, December 2017.
Xinyu Zhang, Ying Hu, Bradley E Aouizerat, Gang Peng, Vincent C Marconi, Michael J Corley, Todd Hulgan,
Kendall J Bryant, Hongyu Zhao, John H Krystal, Amy C Justice, and Ke Xu. Machine learning selected
smoking-associated DNA methylation signatures that predict HIV prognosis and mortality. Clin. Epigenet-
ics, 10(1):155, December 2018.
Wanding Zhou, Timothy J Triche Jr, Peter W Laird, and Hui Shen. Sesame: reducing artifactual detection of
dna methylation by infinium beadchips in genomic deletions. Nucleic acids research, 46(20):e123–e123,
2018.
17
</reproducibility_statement>

<appendix>
# Appendix

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
A
APPENDIX
A.1
LIMITATIONS
The current version of our benchmark harbors several important limitations. First, some selected
conditions might not actually fulfill the suggested criteria, especially regarding their effect on blood
DNA methylation, although we did our best to identify the most unambiguous ones. From the other
hand, some conditions that fit our criteria might have escaped our attention. Second, the conditions
are not represented uniformly, with some being featured in 10+ datasets (HIV, rheumatoid arthritis),
and some present in a single dataset with few samples (ischemic heart disease, chronic obstruc-
tive pulmonary disease, congenital generalized lipodystrophy). The third limitation arises from the
known issue of hidden subgroups of patients and mislabeled instances (Varoquaux & Cheplygina,
2022). For the AAC cohorts, having hidden co-morbidities is acceptable, as they would supposedly
exaggerate aging acceleration even stronger. Conversely, having severe, but unlabeled diseases in
the HC cohort would likely substantially alter the findings of our benchmark. Unfortunately, we can
neither expand our dataset to cover all conditions equally, nor explicitly confirm if all studies at hand
comply with our requirements.
A.2
FUTURE WORK
We plan to further extend our benchmarking dataset by incorporating open access data of additional
modalities, such as clinical biochemistry, transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics, etc. To over-
come the aforementioned limitations, we strongly urge an open discussion on developing a panel of
conditions and datasets that would serve as the gold standard for reliable and comprehensive valida-
tion of emerging biomarkers of aging. We also believe that it is important to expand the benchmark
to animal models, since collecting the required data and developing preclinical biomarkers of ag-
ing in some animals is associated with fewer ethical and financial challenges. Hopefully, all these
issues and developments will be addressed by the efforts of a recently established Biomarkers of
Aging Consortium (https://www.agingconsortium.org/). Ultimately, the “correct” BA
estimator should satisfy all four properties we defined in the Introduction. Regardless of the clock
generation or data modality, reliable aging clock models must also be able to assess the uncertainty
of their own predictions before being integrated in clinical trials (Chua et al., 2023; Kriukov et al.,
2023). And indeed, an example of uncertainty-aware aging clocks has recently been proposed (Var-
shavsky et al., 2023). We also aim to upgrade our package to facilitate the interaction with other
clock-related resources, including Biolearn (Ying et al., 2023) and pyaging (de Lima Camillo, 2024).
A.3
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO MISSING VALUES IMPUTATION
We ran additional experiments (see Table A1) to test different imputation methods and observed
that the method we used (Sesame450k) leads to the most accurate age predictions across all models
except the VidalBralo clock, whose MAE is 0.19% lower when using imputation by zeros. We
did not have to impute all 800k+ sites in the whole dataset, as we only imputed sites included in
each respective clock model. Importantly, the results in other benchmarking tasks remained intact,
regardless of the imputation strategies.
A.4
SOCIETAL IMPACT
The obvious positive societal impact of our work is the prospect of increased active lifespan and
that of healthy longevity. Our benchmarking methodology assists in determining the most accurate
predictors of the biological age, which, in turn, assists in delineating the crucial biomarkers and
factors that might prolong the healthy life. The potential negative impact entails the common issues
emphasized when a fundamental biological problem is tackled with the AI tools. Specific to the
subject of longevity are the issues of pre-mature excitement in the mass media when a certain factor
is hypothesized to prolong life. A relevant fraud in the pharmaceutical industry is also plausible, if
not regulated. One could also envision the depletion of resources caused by an overpopulation of the
Earth, which might happen if the longevity drug is found. These negative possibilities are not ex-
pected to be sudden and could be mitigated gradually – similarly to a plethora of other benchmarking
works established for solving important biological problems.
18

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Table A1: MAE results (in years) for different strategies of missing values imputation.
Model name
Sesame 450k
Average
Zeros
HorvathV2
4.143847
4.701762
4.719477
HorvathV1
5.350622
5.475857
5.475857
GrimAgeV1
7.462245
8.102066
8.241653
Lin
7.467559
8.367630
8.429655
Hannum
7.477633
7.890421
7.907489
PhenoAgeV2
7.604413
8.439977
8.432397
PhenoAgeV1
8.009677
8.380239
8.381561
YingCausAge
8.969959
11.599078
11.551690
VidalBralo
9.124225
9.124387
9.107015
GrimAgeV2
9.796544
10.513198
10.576180
Zhang19 EN
10.534452
10.611938
10.611938
YingDamAge
19.534224
20.179561
20.211066
YingAdaptAge
19.972273
23.287544
23.353844
A.5
MOTIVATION BEHIND INCLUDING OR EXCLUDING PARTICULAR CONDITIONS
Our first criterion for selecting aging-accelerating conditions (AACs) was that having an AAC must
lead to decreased life expectancy (LE) compared to the general population, even when treated with
existing therapies. As we have mentioned earlier, this decrease in LE and the corresponding increase
in mortality must result mainly from intrinsic organismal causes rather than from socioeconomic fac-
tors and self-destructive behaviors related to a given condition. Thus, while Down syndrome (DS) is
associated with elevated prevalence of multiple chronic diseases (O’Leary et al., 2018; Landes et al.,
2020; Baksh et al., 2023), LE of DS individuals has grown dramatically by over 450% from 1960
to 2007 (Presson et al., 2013), even though no cure for DS has been developed, suggesting strong
non-biological confounding factors at play. Additionally, while some authors expect DS to display
accelerated epigenetic aging (Horvath, 2013), others anticipate deceleration when applying epige-
netic clocks to DS blood samples, as DS individuals are hypothesized to feature juvenile blood (Mei
et al., 2023). Schizophrenia (SZ) is another example of a controversial condition: while we can find
increased incidence of age-related comorbidities such as cardiovascular diseases, cancers, or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (Olfson et al., 2015; Oakley et al., 2018; Yung et al., 2021), the rates
of suicide and substance-induced death are also increased in people with SZ (Olfson et al., 2015).
We therefore suggest excluding such ambiguous conditions from robust clock benchmarking, as it
is currently difficult to disentangle functional organismal deterioration from external and behavioral
condition-related confounders and evaluate the degree to which the latter influence LE.
Regarding cancers in general, it is difficult to formulate a pre-hoc hypothesis about the directionality
of epigenetic age changes. Even though we know that DNAm can be used to create signatures
of various cancers, and that changes in some DNAm sites are shared between aging and cancers
(Yu et al., 2020), we cannot be certain that an aging clock would indicate accelerated aging in
cancerous samples, as some cancer-specific and stem cell-like features such as telomere maintenance
might prompt a clock model to treat it as a marker of partial rejuvenation. In support of these
considerations, epigenetic age predictions were found to exhibit no correlation with multiple TCGA
cancer types (Lin & Wagner, 2015). To avoid possible speculation as far as possible, we recommend
excluding cancer from clock benchmarking, as it is difficult to hypothesize about clock performance
in such complex phenomena.
Aging-decelerating condition (ADC) is defined as a condition that increases LE compared to the
general population and features the same second and third criteria as an AAC. With respect to hu-
man data, however, the ADCs are difficult to determine, as human lifespan-increasing interventions
are yet to emerge. There are genetic mutations, such as Laron syndrome (growth hormone insen-
sitivity) or isolated growth hormone deficiency (growth hormone releasing hormone insensitivity),
that appear to protect against some age-related pathologies, but they do not feature a prolonged lifes-
19

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
pan (Aguiar-Oliveira & Bartke, 2019). To avoid dubious interpretation, we recommend omitting the
inclusion of any condition into the ADC category when benchmarking human aging clocks.
The resulting list of condition classes and conditions selected to represent accelerated aging is listed
in Table A2. Population-based evidence for condition inclusion and the number of datasets found
and selected per condition are displayed in Table A3.
20

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Table A2: Aging-accelerating conditions. ICD-10: class or condition code(s) from the International
Classification of Diseases Version 10; a dash indicates lack of specific code; abbr.: abbreviation.
Condition
class
Class
ICD-10
Class
abbr.
Aging-accelerating
condition (AAC)
Condition
ICD-10
Condition
abbr.
Cardio-
vascular
diseases
I00-
I99
CVD
Atherosclerosis
I70
AS
Ischemic heart disease
I20-I25
IHD
Cerebrovascular accident
I60-I63
CVA
Heart failure
I50
HF
Myocardial infarction
I21-I22
MCI
Immune
system
diseases
—
ISD
Inflammatory bowel disease
K50-K51
IBD
Human immunodeficiency
virus infection
B20-B24
HIV
Kidney
diseases
N00-
N99
KDD
Chronic kidney disease
N18
CKD
Liver
diseases
K70-
K77
LVD
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis
K75.81
NASH
Primary biliary cholangitis
K74.3
PBC
Primary sclerosing cholangitis
K83.01
PSC
Cirrhosis
K70.3,
K74.3-
K74.6
CIR
Metabolic
diseases
E00-
E90
MBD
Extreme obesity
E66.01,
E66.2
XOB
Type 1 diabetes
E10
T1D
Type 2 diabetes
E11
T2D
Metabolic syndrome
E88.810
MBS
Musculo-
skeletal
diseases
M00-
M99
MSD
Sarcopenia
M62.84
SP
Osteoporosis
M80-M81
OP
Osteoarthritis
M15-M19
OA
Rheumatoid arthritis
M05-M06
RA
Neuro-
degenerative
diseases
G00-
G99
NDD
Alzheimer’s disease
G30
AD
Parkinson’s disease
G20
PD
Multiple sclerosis
G35
MS
Dementia with Lewy bodies
G31.83
DLB
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease
A81.0
CJD
Respiratory
diseases
J00-
J99
RSD
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
J44
COPD
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
J84.112
IPF
Tuberculosis
A15
TB
Progeroid
syndromes
—
PGS
Werner syndrome
E34.8
WS
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome
E34.8
HGPS
Congenital generalized lipodystrophy
E88.1
CGL
Dyskeratosis congenita
Q82.8
DKC
21

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Table A3: Population-based evidence for condition inclusion, and the number of datasets found and
selected for each condition. GEO: Gene Expression Omnibus database; abbr.: abbreviation.
CVD
AS
Chen et al. (2023a); Costa et al. (2021); Ikeda &
Ohishi (2019); Lernfelt et al. (2002); Sutton-Tyrrell
et al. (1995)
22
3
IHD
Martin et al. (2024); Dai et al. (2022); Hartley et al.
(2016); Bertuccio et al. (2011)
21
1
CVA
Martin et al. (2024); GBD 2019 Stroke Collaborators
(2021); Xian et al. (2012); Grysiewicz et al. (2008)
10
2
HF
Martin et al. (2024); Bytyc¸i & Bajraktari (2015);
Shahar et al. (2004)
14
0
MCI
Martin et al. (2024); Bucholz et al. (2015); Saaby
et al. (2014)
19
0
ISD
IBD
Duricova et al. (2010); Canavan et al. (2007); Dong
et al. (2020); Gyde et al. (1982); Kuenzig et al.
(2020); Selinger & Leong (2012); Card et al. (2003)
30
4
HIV
Martin et al. (2024); Trickey et al. (2023); Legarth
et al. (2016); May et al. (2014); Nakagawa et al.
(2013)
44
15
KDD
CKD
Ke et al. (2022); Tonelli et al. (2006); Kim et al.
(2019)
6
0
LVD
NASH
Sheka et al. (2020); Younossi et al. (2019)
8
0
PBC
Sayiner et al. (2019); Lleo et al. (2016)
1
0
PSC
Card et al. (2008); Kornfeld et al. (1997)
2
0
CIR
Martin et al. (2024); Xiao et al. (2023); Dam Fialla
et al. (2012)
68
0
MBD
XOB
Martin et al. (2024); Kitahara et al. (2014); Masters
et al. (2013); Fontaine et al. (2003); Solomon &
Manson (1997)
96
4
T1D
Ruiz et al. (2022); Heald et al. (2020); Rawshani et al.
(2018); Huo et al. (2016); Livingstone et al. (2015);
Harjutsalo et al. (2011)
14
1
T2D
Martin et al. (2024); Emerging Risk Factors
Collaboration (2023); Zhu et al. (2022b); Wright et al.
(2017); Mulnier et al. (2006); Zhu et al. (2022a)
45
1
MBS
Martin et al. (2024); K¨ar¨aj¨am¨aki et al. (2022); Wu
et al. (2010); Mozaffarian et al. (2008)
17
0
Class
abbr.
Condi-
tion
abbr.
Evidence of decreased
life expectancy
N items
in the
GEO
query
N
datasets
after
filtering
Continued on next page
22

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Table A3: Population-based evidence for condition inclusion, and the number of datasets found
and selected for each condition. GEO: Gene Expression Omnibus database; abbr.: abbreviation.
(Continued)
MSD
SP
Xu et al. (2022); Brown et al. (2016); Chang & Lin
(2016)
2
0
OP
Rashki Kemmak et al. (2020); Abrahamsen et al.
(2015); Center et al. (1999); Cherny et al. (2010)
5
1
OA
Martin et al. (2024); Liu et al. (2022); Fu et al. (2022);
Liu et al. (2015)
26
0
RA
Chiu et al. (2021); Zhang et al. (2017b); Lassere et al.
(2013); Jacobsson et al. (1993)
37
10
NDD
AD
Martin et al. (2024); Li et al. (2022); Liang et al.
(2021a); Ganguli et al. (2005); Dodge et al. (2003)
43
2
PD
Macleod et al. (2014); Willis et al. (2012); Posada
et al. (2011)
37
6
MS
Qian et al. (2023); Lunde et al. (2017); Leray et al.
(2015)
29
8
DLB
Liang et al. (2021b); Mueller et al. (2019); Price et al.
(2017)
5
0
CJD
Nishimura et al. (2020); Llorens et al. (2020); Gelpi
et al. (2008)
1
1
RSD
COPD
Martin et al. (2024); Park et al. (2019); Ruvuna &
Sood (2020); Lange et al. (2016)
14
1
IPF
Lancaster et al. (2022); Hutchinson et al. (2014); Kolb
& Collard (2014); Fern´andez P´erez et al. (2010)
14
0
TB
Martin et al. (2024); Menzies et al. (2021);
Lee-Rodriguez et al. (2020)
13
3
PGS
WS
Schnabel et al. (2021); Oshima & Hisama (2014);
Goto (1997)
7
1
HGPS
Schnabel et al. (2021); Hennekam (2006)
14
1
CGL
Lima et al. (2018); Seip & Trygstad (1996)
1
1
DKC
Al Nuaimi et al. (2020)
2
0
Total number of datasets
66
Class
abbr.
Condi-
tion
abbr.
Evidence of decreased
life expectancy
N items
in the
GEO
query
N
datasets
after
filtering
A.6
ON DATA TYPES USED FOR AGING CLOCKS CONSTRUCTION
Multiple data modalities were previously used for aging clocks construction. Some examples be-
yond DNA methylation data include also clinical blood samples (Putin et al., 2016), psycho-social
questionnaires (Zhavoronkov et al., 2020), facial images (Xia et al., 2020), urine metabolites (Hertel
et al., 2016), and different omics data, gene expression (Holzscheck et al., 2021), DNA accessibility
(Morandini et al., 2024), plasma proteins (Sathyan et al., 2020), etc. Interestingly, DNA methylation
data allow one the most accurate prediction of chronological age compared to other data modalities,
second only to facial imaging data (Xia et al., 2021), and it continues to be used most widely in
aging clock construction (Rutledge et al., 2022). It is also important to note that from a practical
point of view, in order to construct a clinically relevant aging clock, the method of obtaining the data
23

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
should not be too invasive and heavy-handed. For this reason, many clock developers prefer using
blood, saliva, or buccal epithelial samples as data sources.
A.7
ON ACCESSIBILITY OF EXISTING EPIGENETIC MORTALITY DATA
Although there are some existing biobanks that aggregate sensitive human data and provide them in
an open-access manner, (e.g., NHANES: https://wwwn.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/), most
biobanks rely on authorized access to their data (e.g., UK Biobank: https://www.ukbiobank.
ac.uk/). The similar semi-open situation occurs with DNA methylation data. Here, we provide in-
formation about 12 cohort studies containing DNA methylation data and mortality/morbidity infor-
mation simultaneously, but all of which allow downloading their data upon a reasonable request by
contacting with the principal investigators of each cohort or by requesting data on a special platform.
These studies include the Framingham Heart Study (FHS), the Women’s Health Initiative (WHI), the
Lothian Birth Cohorts (LBC), the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC), the Cardiovascular
Health Study (CHS), the Normative Aging Study (NAS), the Invecchiare in Chianti (InCHIANTi),
the Cooperative Health Research in the Region of Augsburg (KORA), the Epidemiologische Studie
zu Chancen der Verh¨utung, Fr¨uherkennung und optimierten Therapie chronischer Erkrankungen in
der ¨alteren Bev¨olkerung (ESTHER), the Danish Twin Register sample (DTR), the Rotterdam Study
(RS), and the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults (CARDIA) (Moqri et al., 2024;
Huan et al., 2022). While we recognize the risks associated with releasing sensitive patient data
into the public domain, we also want to emphasize that comprehensive independent validation of
the aging clock is difficult without this important datasets. The confidentiality of this data also does
not allow us to use it as part of this open-access benchmark. Instead, we focused on epigenetic data
from patients with AACs distributed across human lifespan, which did not contain information on
mortality, but was publicly accessible.
A.8
DNA METHYLATION DATA COLLECTION
As we have mentioned in the Methodology section, dataset search was performed using the
NCBI Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) database, an unrestricted-access omics data repository
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) which shares data using the Open Database Li-
cense (ODbL). The resulting list of 66 AAC datasets (Reynolds et al., 2014; Nazarenko et al., 2015;
Soriano-T´arraga et al., 2016; Istas et al., 2017; Cullell et al., 2022; Harris et al., 2012; Horvath &
Levine, 2015; Gross et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2016; Li Yim et al., 2016; Ventham et al., 2016;
Zhang et al., 2017a; 2018; Oriol-Tordera et al., 2020; DiNardo et al., 2020; Oriol-Tordera et al.,
2022; Esteban-Cantos et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2013; Fernandez-Rebollo et al., 2018; Rhead et al.,
2017; Clark et al., 2020; Tao et al., 2021; de la Calle-Fabregat et al., 2021; Juli`a et al., 2022; Chen
et al., 2023b; Day et al., 2013; Rakyan et al., 2011; Lunnon et al., 2015; Ramos-Molina et al., 2019;
Noronha et al., 2022; Marabita et al., 2013; Lunnon et al., 2014; Horvath & Ritz, 2015; Castro
et al., 2019; Kular et al., 2018; Chuang et al., 2017; 2019; Ntranos et al., 2019; Ewing et al., 2019;
Carlstr¨om et al., 2019; Roubroeks et al., 2020; Go et al., 2020; Dabin et al., 2020; Bingen et al.,
2022; Esterhuyse et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2021; 2020; Maierhofer et al., 2019; Bejaoui et al., 2022;
Qannan et al., 2023) indicated in Table A3 is visualized in Fig. 2E and includes: atherosclerosis
(AS), ischemic heart disease (IHD, also known as coronary heart disease), cerebrovascular accident
(CVA, also known as stroke), inflammatory bowel disease (IBD, including Crohn’s disease and ul-
cerative colitis), human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV), extreme obesity (XOB, defined
by having BMI ≥40 kg/m2 (Purnell, 2015; Busebee et al., 2023); also known as class III obe-
sity, severe obesity, or morbid obesity), type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D), type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2D), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), osteoporosis (OP), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Parkinson’s dis-
ease (PD), multiple sclerosis (MS), Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), tuberculosis (TB), Werner syndrome (WS, including atypical Werner syndrome),
Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome (HGPS, including non-classical progeroid laminopathies),
and congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL, also known as Berardinelli-Seip lipodystrophy).
Age distribution across conditions is demonstrated in Fig. A1. An overview of all datasets and their
age distributions is provided in Fig. A2. The information on how patient consent was obtained and
which ethics procedures were implemented can be accessed in the respective publications. As per
NCBI GEO guidelines, all submitters must ”ensure that the submitted information does not compro-
mise participant privacy” (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/info/faq.html).
24

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
HC
HC
0
20
40
60
80
Age distribution (years)
AS
CVA
IHD
CVD
HIVHIV+TBIBD
ISD
T1D
T2D
XOB
MBD
OP
RA
MSD
AD
CJD
MS
PD
NDD
COPD
TB
RSD
CGL HGPS WS
PGS
Donor gender
Male
Female
Unknown
Figure A1: Distribution of dataset samples per condition across ages.
A.9
DNA METHYLATION DATA PROCESSING
After pre-processing raw output from microarrays or sequencing machines, DNA methylation levels
per site are reported quantitatively either as beta values, or as M values. Briefly, beta values represent
the ratio of methylated signal (probe intensity or sequencing read counts) to total signal per site (sum
of methylated and unmethylated probe intensities or sequencing read counts), while M value is the
log2 ratio of the methylated signal versus an unmethylated signal. A more thorough comparison of
the two measures can be found in Du et al. (2010). In the original datasets deposited on GEO, DNA
methylation values were represented either as a beta fraction (ranging from 0 to 1), beta percentages
(ranging from 0 to 100), or M-values (can be both negative and positive, equals 0 when beta equals
0.5). We converted all data to the beta-value fractions ranging from 0 to 1. The values outside
this range were treated as missing values (NaNs), as they are not biological. In each dataset, only
samples that were relevant for benchmarking (that is, were annotated by age, tissue, and condition)
were retained.
The resulting datasets meta-data contains the following fields: DatasetID (datasets GEO ID), Plat-
formID (GEO ID of a DNA methylation profiling platform), Tissue (sample source tissue: “Blood”
stands for peripheral blood samples, “Saliva”—for saliva samples, and “Buccal”—for buccal swab
samples), CellType (sample cell type: either a specific cell population, e.g., immune cell subtypes
with cell type-specific molecular markers, or broader categories such as whole blood, buffy coat,
peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC), or peripheral blood leukocytes (PBL); some samples
lack this annotation), Gender (abbreviated sample donor gender: M = Male, F = Female, U = Un-
known), Age (sample donor chronological age in years; in the original datasets deposited on GEO,
it can be either rounded by the researchers to full years, or converted from months, weeks, or days;
where available, we calculated years from the smaller units), Condition (one of AACs or HC), and
Class.
As there is no gold standard for DNAm processing, each research group carries out their preferred
pipeline that does not necessarily match the processing pipeline used for training the clock model,
especially in case of applying earlier clocks (e.g., those by Hannum et al. (2013) or Horvath (2013)).
Therefore, so as to retain this typical workflow and not to put any clock model into advantage by
choosing the same processing that matches its own pipeline for every dataset, we did not perform
any post-processing, inter-dataset normalization, or batch effect correction. In doing so, we also
relied on two existing papers. First, compiling already pre-processed datasets without performing
the same processing for all of them was done by Ying et al. (2023), another notable effort in the aging
clock community. Second, we were also encouraged by a recent work by Varshavsky et al. (2023)
who managed to create an accurate clock model by combining several blood datasets—without any
additional normalization or correction procedure, using already pre-processed data from previous
25

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Reynolds, 2014
GSE56046
450K
B
CVD
AS
Reynolds, 2014
GSE56581
450K
B
CVD
AS
Nazarenko, 2014
GSE62867
27K
B
CVD
IHD
Soriano-Tárraga, 2016
GSE69138
450K
B
CVD
CVA
Istas, 2017
GSE107143
450K
B
CVD
AS
Cullell, 2022
GSE203399
450K, 850K
B
CVD
CVA
Harris, 2012
GSE32148
450K
B
ISD
IBD
Horvath, 2015a
GSE53840
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Horvath, 2015a
GSE53841
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Gross, 2016
GSE67705
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Horvath, 2015a
GSE67751
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Zhang, 2016
GSE77696
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Li Yim, 2016
GSE81961
450K
B
ISD
IBD
Ventham, 2016
GSE87640
450K
B
ISD
IBD
Ventham, 2016
GSE87648
450K
B
ISD
IBD
Zhang, 2017
GSE100264
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Zhang, 2017
GSE107080
850K
B
ISD
HIV
Zhang, 2018
GSE117859
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Zhang, 2018
GSE117860
850K
B
ISD
HIV
Oriol-Tordera, 2020
GSE140800
450K
B
ISD
HIV
GSE143942
450K
B
ISD
HIV
DiNardo, 2020
GSE145714
850K
B
ISD
HIV+TB
Oriol-Tordera, 2022
GSE185389
450K
B
ISD
HIV
Oriol-Tordera, 2022
GSE185390
850K
B
ISD
HIV
Esteban-Cantos, 2023
GSE217633
850K
B
ISD
HIV
Day, 2013
GSE49909
27K
B
MBD
XOB
Rakyan, 2011
GSE56606
27K
B
MBD
T1D
Lunnon, 2015
GSE62003
450K
B
MBD
T2D
Ramos-Molina, 2019
GSE131461
850K
B
MBD
XOB
GSE166611
450K
B
MBD
XOB
Noronha, 2022
GSE193836
450K
B
MBD
XOB
Liu, 2013
GSE42861
450K
B
MSD
RA
GSE71841
450K
B
MSD
RA
Fernandez-Rebollo, 2018
GSE99624
450K
B
MSD
OP
Rhead, 2017
GSE131989
450K
B
MSD
RA
Unpublished
GSE134429
850K
B
MSD
RA
Clark, 2020
GSE137593
850K
B
MSD
RA
Clark, 2020
GSE137594
850K
B
MSD
RA
Tao, 2021
GSE138653
850K
B
MSD
RA
de la Calle-Fabregat, 2021
GSE175364
450K, 850K
B
MSD
RA
Julià, 2022
GSE176168
850K
B
MSD
RA
Chen, 2023
GSE228104
850K
B
MSD
RA
Marabita, 2013
GSE43976
450K
B
NDD
MS
Lunnon, 2014
GSE59685
450K
B
NDD
AD
Horvath, 2015b
GSE72774
450K
B
NDD
PD
Horvath, 2015b
GSE72776
450K
B
NDD
PD
Castro, 2019
GSE103929
450K
B
NDD
MS
Kular, 2019
GSE106648
450K
B
NDD
MS
Chuang, 2017
GSE111223
450K
S
NDD
PD
Chuang, 2017
GSE111629
450K
B
NDD
PD
Ntranos, 2019
GSE112596
850K
B
NDD
MS
GSE122244
850K
B
NDD
PD
Ewing, 2019
GSE130029
450K
B
NDD
MS
Ewing, 2019
GSE130030
450K
B
NDD
MS
Carlström, 2019
GSE130491
850K
B
NDD
MS
Roubroeks, 2020
GSE144858
450K
B
NDD
AD
Go, 2020
GSE151355
450K
B
NDD
PD
Dabin, 2020
GSE156994
450K
B
NDD
CJD
Bingen, 2023
GSE219293
850K
B
NDD
MS
Esterhuyse, 2015
GSE72338
450K
B
RSD
TB
Chen, 2021
GSE118468
450K
B
RSD
COPD
Chen, 2020
GSE118469
450K
B
RSD
TB
DiNardo, 2020
GSE145714
850K
B
RSD
TB
Maierhofer, 2019
GSE131752
850K
B
PGS
WS
Bejaoui, 2022
GSE182991
850K
B
PGS
HGPS
Qannan, 2022
GSE214297
850K
B
PGS
CGL
Name
Dataset ID
Platform
Tissue
Class
Condition
N samples
Age distribution
0
50
Condition classes included in the benchmarking dataset
HC
CVD
ISD
MBD
MSD
NDD
RSD
PGS
6
88
19
27
24
91 189
69
23
117 261
25
15
70
10
8
56
30
43
40
9
63
27
58
20
17
11
11
10
12
12
16
32
32
31
80
13
8
40
52
38
46
49
34
35
11
20
14
14
82
96
93
20
18
29
20
16
10
14
24
21
12
15
97
Figure A2: Descriptive statistics of datasets included in the benchmark. B: blood, S: saliva. Ages
are indicated in years.
26

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Table A4: Aging clock models tested in our benchmark.
Model
name
Number
of CpGs
Gene-
ration
Extra
para-
meters
Tissues
used
for training
Reference
Hannum
71
1
—
Blood
Hannum et al. (2013)
HorvathV1
1
—
Multi-tissue
Horvath (2013)
Lin
99
1
—
Blood
Lin et al. (2016)
VidalBralo
8
1
—
Blood
Vidal-Bralo et al. (2016)
HorvathV2
1
—
Blood, Skin
Horvath et al. (2018)
PhenoAgeV1
2
—
Blood
Levine et al. (2018)
Zhang19 EN
1
—
Blood, Saliva
Zhang et al. (2019)
GrimAgeV1
2
Age, Sex
Blood
Lu et al. (2019)
GrimAgeV2
2
Age, Sex
Blood
Lu et al. (2022)
PhenoAgeV2
2
—
Blood
Higgins-Chen et al. (2022)
YingAdaptAge
1
—
Blood
Ying et al. (2024)
YingCausAge
1
—
Blood
Ying et al. (2024)
YingDamAge
1
—
Blood
Ying et al. (2024)
studies (some of which are included in our dataset as well), and thus demonstrating that the between-
dataset normalization is not critical for this type of data.
A.10
AGING CLOCKS INCLUDED IN THE BENCHMARKING
The full list of published aging clocks used in this analysis is provided in Table A4.
A.11
BENCHMARKING RESULTS WITHOUT FDR CORRECTION
Figures A3 and A4 demonstrate benchmarking results before applying FDR correction.
27

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
PhenoAgeV2
GrimAgeV2
GrimAgeV1
PhenoAgeV1
YingAdaptAge
Lin
YingCausAge
HorvathV2
VidalBralo
HorvathV1
Hannum
YingDamAge
Zhang19_EN
Model
CVD
ISD
MBD
MSD
NDD
PGS
RSD
Total
0/3
7/10
0/4
4/6
6/12
1/3
3/4
21/42
0/3
7/10
0/4
3/6
2/12
2/3
3/4
17/42
0/3
7/10
0/4
3/6
2/12
2/3
2/4
16/42
0/3
6/10
0/4
2/6
1/12
1/3
1/4
11/42
0/3
6/10
0/4
1/6
1/12
2/3
0/4
10/42
0/3
7/10
0/4
0/6
1/12
0/3
1/4
9/42
0/3
4/10
0/4
1/6
1/12
2/3
0/4
8/42
0/3
4/10
0/4
0/6
2/12
2/3
0/4
8/42
0/3
5/10
0/4
1/6
0/12
1/3
0/4
7/42
0/3
5/10
0/4
0/6
0/12
1/3
0/4
6/42
0/3
3/10
0/4
1/6
1/12
1/3
0/4
6/42
0/3
3/10
0/4
0/6
1/12
1/3
0/4
5/42
0/3
2/10
0/4
0/6
0/12
1/3
0/4
3/42
Figure A3: AA2 task results split into columns by condition class without FDR correction of P-
values. Scores demonstrate the number of datasets per class, in which a given clock model detected
significant (at the 0.05 level of significance) difference between the HC and AAC cohorts.
GrimAgeV2
Zhang19_EN
Hannum
GrimAgeV1
VidalBralo
HorvathV2
HorvathV1
YingAdaptAge
PhenoAgeV2
Lin
PhenoAgeV1
YingDamAge
YingCausAge
Model
CVD
ISD
MBD
MSD
NDD
Total
3/3
9/9
2/2
2/5
4/5
20/24
0/3
9/9
1/2
5/5
4/5
19/24
1/3
9/9
2/2
2/5
4/5
18/24
1/3
9/9
2/2
2/5
2/5
16/24
1/3
9/9
1/2
1/5
1/5
13/24
0/3
9/9 0/2
0/5
3/5
12/24
0/3
7/9
1/2
2/5
2/5
12/24
1/3
4/9
1/2
2/5
3/5
11/24
0/3
6/9
1/2
2/5
1/5
10/24
0/3
8/9
0/2
0/5
1/5
9/24
0/3
6/9
0/2
0/5
1/5
7/24
0/3
5/9
1/2
0/5
0/5
6/24
0/3
2/9
0/2
1/5
0/5
3/24
Figure A4: AA1 task results without FDR correction of P-values: same as Fig. A3, but the
statistics are calculated for datasets containing the AAC cohort only.
APPENDIX REFERENCES
Bo Abrahamsen, Clive Osmond, and Cyrus Cooper. Life expectancy in patients treated for osteoporosis: Ob-
servational cohort study using national danish prescription data. J. Bone Miner. Res., 30(9):1553–1559,
28

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
September 2015.
Manuel H Aguiar-Oliveira and Andrzej Bartke. Growth hormone deficiency: health and longevity. Endocrine
reviews, 40(2):575–601, 2019.
Mohammed Al Nuaimi, Evelyn Elias, Albert Catala, Bozana Zlateska, Yeon Jung Lim, Robert J Klaassen,
Geoff DE Cuvelier, Conrad Fernandez, Meera Rayar, MacGregor Steele, et al. Genotypic and phenotypic
spectrum of dyskeratosis congenita: Results from the canadian inherited marrow failure registry. Blood, 136:
8–9, 2020.
R Asaad Baksh, Sarah E Pape, Li F Chan, Aisha A Aslam, Martin C Gulliford, and Andre Strydom. Multiple
morbidity across the lifespan in people with down syndrome or intellectual disabilities: a population-based
cohort study using electronic health records. The Lancet Public Health, 8(6):e453–e462, 2023.
Yosra Bejaoui, Aleem Razzaq, Noha A Yousri, Junko Oshima, Andre Megarbane, Abeer Qannan, Ramya
Potabattula, Tanvir Alam, George M Martin, Henning F Horn, Thomas Haaf, Steve Horvath, and Nady
El Hajj. DNA methylation signatures in blood DNA of Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome. Aging Cell,
21(2):e13555, February 2022.
Paola Bertuccio, Fabio Levi, Francesca Lucchini, Liliane Chatenoud, Cristina Bosetti, Eva Negri, and Carlo
La Vecchia. Coronary heart disease and cerebrovascular disease mortality in young adults: recent trends in
europe. Eur. J. Cardiovasc. Prev. Rehabil., 18(4):627–634, August 2011.
Jeremy M Bingen, Lindsay V Clark, Mark R Band, Ilyas Munzir, and Michael D Carrithers. Differential DNA
methylation associated with multiple sclerosis and disease modifying treatments in an underrepresented
minority population. Front. Genet., 13:1058817, 2022.
Justin C Brown, Michael O Harhay, and Meera N Harhay. Sarcopenia and mortality among a population-based
sample of community-dwelling older adults. J. Cachexia Sarcopenia Muscle, 7(3):290–298, June 2016.
Emily M Bucholz, Sharon-Lise T Normand, Yun Wang, Shuangge Ma, Haiqun Lin, and Harlan M Krumholz.
Life expectancy and years of potential life lost after acute myocardial infarction by sex and race: A cohort-
based study of medicare beneficiaries. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., 66(6):645–655, August 2015.
Bradley Busebee, Wissam Ghusn, Lizeth Cifuentes, and Andres Acosta. Obesity: A review of pathophysiology
and classification. In Mayo Clinic Proceedings. Elsevier, 2023.
Ibadete Bytyc¸i and Gani Bajraktari. Mortality in heart failure patients. Anatol. J. Cardiol., 15(1):63–68, January
2015.
C Canavan, K R Abrams, and J F Mayberry. Meta-analysis: mortality in crohn’s disease. Aliment. Pharmacol.
Ther., 25(8):861–870, April 2007.
Tim Card, Richard Hubbard, and Richard F A Logan. Mortality in inflammatory bowel disease: a population-
based cohort study. Gastroenterology, 125(6):1583–1590, December 2003.
Tim R Card, Masoud Solaymani-Dodaran, and Joe West. Incidence and mortality of primary sclerosing cholan-
gitis in the UK: a population-based cohort study. J. Hepatol., 48(6):939–944, June 2008.
Karl E Carlstr¨om, Ewoud Ewing, Mathias Granqvist, Alexandra Gyllenberg, Shahin Aeinehband, Sara Lind
Enoksson, Antonio Checa, Tejaswi V S Badam, Jesse Huang, David Gomez-Cabrero, Mika Gustafsson,
Faiez Al Nimer, Craig E Wheelock, Ingrid Kockum, Tomas Olsson, Maja Jagodic, and Fredrik Piehl. Ther-
apeutic efficacy of dimethyl fumarate in relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis associates with ROS pathway
in monocytes. Nat. Commun., 10(1):3081, July 2019.
Kamilah Castro, Achilles Ntranos, Mario Amatruda, Maria Petracca, Peter Kosa, Emily Y Chen, Johannes
Morstein, Dirk Trauner, Corey T Watson, Michael A Kiebish, Bibiana Bielekova, Matilde Inglese, Ilana
Katz Sand, and Patrizia Casaccia. Body mass index in multiple sclerosis modulates ceramide-induced DNA
methylation and disease course. EBioMedicine, 43:392–410, May 2019.
J R Center, T V Nguyen, D Schneider, P N Sambrook, and J A Eisman. Mortality after all major types of
osteoporotic fracture in men and women: an observational study. Lancet, 353(9156):878–882, March 1999.
Shu-Fang Chang and Pei-Ling Lin. Systematic literature review and meta-analysis of the association of sar-
copenia with mortality. Worldviews Evid. Based. Nurs., 13(2):153–162, April 2016.
Weihua Chen, Zeya Li, Yu Zhao, Yitian Chen, and Rongchong Huang.
Global and national burden of
atherosclerosis from 1990 to 2019: trend analysis based on the global burden of disease study 2019. Chin.
Med. J. (Engl.), 136(20):2442–2450, October 2023a.
29

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Yulan Chen, Qiao Wang, Haina Liu, Lei Jin, Xin Feng, Bingbing Dai, Meng Chen, Fangran Xin, Tingting Wei,
Bingqing Bai, Zhijun Fan, Jiahui Li, Yuxin Yao, Ruobing Liao, Jintao Zhang, Xiangnan Jin, and Lingyu
Fu. The prognostic value of whole-genome DNA methylation in response to leflunomide in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis. Front. Immunol., 14:1173187, September 2023b.
Yung-Che Chen, Chang-Chun Hsiao, Ting-Wen Chen, Chao-Chien Wu, Tung-Ying Chao, Sum-Yee Leung,
Hock-Liew Eng, Chiu-Ping Lee, Ting-Ya Wang, and Meng-Chih Lin.
Whole genome DNA methy-
lation analysis of active pulmonary tuberculosis disease identifies novel epigenotypes:
PARP9/miR-
505/RASGRP4/GNG12 gene methylation and clinical phenotypes. Int. J. Mol. Sci., 21(9):3180, April 2020.
Yung-Che Chen, Ying-Huang Tsai, Chin-Chou Wang, Shih-Feng Liu, Ting-Wen Chen, Wen-Feng Fang, Chiu-
Ping Lee, Po-Yuan Hsu, Tung-Ying Chao, Chao-Chien Wu, Yu-Feng Wei, Huang-Chih Chang, Chia-
Cheng Tsen, Yu-Ping Chang, Meng-Chih Lin, and Taiwan Clinical Trial Consortium of Respiratory Disease
(TCORE) group. Epigenome-wide association study on asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
overlap reveals aberrant DNA methylations related to clinical phenotypes. Sci. Rep., 11(1):5022, March
2021.
N Cherny, R Catane, D Schrijvers, M Kloke, and F Strasser. European society for medical oncology (ESMO)
program for the integration of oncology and palliative care: a 5-year review of the designated centers’
incentive program. Ann. Oncol., 21(2):362–369, February 2010.
Ying-Ming Chiu, Yi-Peng Lu, Joung-Liang Lan, Der-Yuan Chen, and Jung-Der Wang. Lifetime risks, life
expectancy, and health care expenditures for rheumatoid arthritis: A nationwide cohort followed up from
2003 to 2016. Arthritis Rheumatol., 73(5):750–758, May 2021.
Michelle Chua, Doyun Kim, Jongmun Choi, Nahyoung G Lee, Vikram Deshpande, Joseph Schwab, Michael H
Lev, Ramon G Gonzalez, Michael S Gee, and Synho Do. Tackling prediction uncertainty in machine learning
for healthcare. Nature Biomedical Engineering, 7(6):711–718, 2023.
Yu-Hsuan Chuang, Kimberly C Paul, Jeff M Bronstein, Yvette Bordelon, Steve Horvath, and Beate Ritz.
Parkinson’s disease is associated with DNA methylation levels in human blood and saliva. Genome Med., 9
(1):76, August 2017.
Yu-Hsuan Chuang, Ake T Lu, Kimberly C Paul, Aline D Folle, Jeff M Bronstein, Yvette Bordelon, Steve
Horvath, and Beate Ritz. Longitudinal epigenome-wide methylation study of cognitive decline and motor
progression in parkinson’s disease. J. Parkinsons. Dis., 9(2):389–400, 2019.
Alexander D Clark, Nisha Nair, Amy E Anderson, Nishanthi Thalayasingam, Najib Naamane, Andrew J Skel-
ton, Julie Diboll, Anne Barton, Stephen Eyre, John D Isaacs, Arthur G Pratt, and Louise N Reynard. Lym-
phocyte DNA methylation mediates genetic risk at shared immune-mediated disease loci. J. Allergy Clin.
Immunol., 145(5):1438–1451, May 2020.
Jo˜ao Costa, Joana Alarc˜ao, Francisco Araujo, Raquel Ascenc¸˜ao, Daniel Caldeira, Francesca Fiorentino, Victor
Gil, Miguel Gouveia, Francisco Lourenc¸o, Alberto Mello E Silva, Filipa Sampaio, Ant´onio Vaz Carneiro,
and Margarida Borges. The burden of atherosclerosis in portugal. Eur. Heart J. Qual. Care Clin. Outcomes,
7(2):154–162, March 2021.
Natalia Cullell, Carolina Soriano-T´arraga, Cristina Gallego-F´abrega, Jara C´arcel-M´arquez, Elena Mui˜no, Laia
Lluci`a-Carol, Miquel Lled´os, Manel Esteller, Manuel Castro de Moura, Joan Montaner, Anna Rosell, Pilar
Delgado, Joan Mart´ı-F´abregas, Jerzy Krupinski, Jaume Roquer, Jordi Jim´enez-Conde, and Israel Fern´andez-
Cadenas. Altered methylation pattern in EXOC4 is associated with stroke outcome: an epigenome-wide
association study. Clin. Epigenetics, 14(1):124, September 2022.
Luke C Dabin, Fernando Guntoro, Tracy Campbell, Tony B´elicard, Adam R Smith, Rebecca G Smith, Rachel
Raybould, Jonathan M Schott, Katie Lunnon, Peter Sarkies, John Collinge, Simon Mead, and Emmanuelle
Vir´e. Altered DNA methylation profiles in blood from patients with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Acta Neuropathol., 140(6):863–879, December 2020.
Haijiang Dai, Arsalan Abu Much, Elad Maor, Elad Asher, Arwa Younis, Yawen Xu, Yao Lu, Xinyao Liu,
Jingxian Shu, and Nicola Luigi Bragazzi. Global, regional, and national burden of ischaemic heart disease
and its attributable risk factors, 1990-2017: results from the global burden of disease study 2017. Eur. Heart
J. Qual. Care Clin. Outcomes, 8(1):50–60, January 2022.
Annette Dam Fialla, Ove B Schaffalitzky de Muckadell, and Annmarie Touborg Lassen. Incidence, etiology
and mortality of cirrhosis: a population-based cohort study. Scand. J. Gastroenterol., 47(6):702–709, June
2012.
30

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Kenneth Day, Lindsay L Waite, Anna Thalacker-Mercer, Andrew West, Marcas M Bamman, James D Brooks,
Richard M Myers, and Devin Absher. Differential DNA methylation with age displays both common and
dynamic features across human tissues that are influenced by CpG landscape. Genome Biol., 14(9):R102,
2013.
Carlos de la Calle-Fabregat, Ellis Niemantsverdriet, Juan D Ca˜nete, Tianlu Li, Annette H M van der Helm-
van Mil, Javier Rodr´ıguez-Ubreva, and Esteban Ballestar. Prediction of the progression of undifferentiated
arthritis to rheumatoid arthritis using DNA methylation profiling. Arthritis Rheumatol., 73(12):2229–2239,
December 2021.
Andrew R DiNardo, Kimal Rajapakshe, Tomoki Nishiguchi, Sandra L Grimm, Godwin Mtetwa, Qiniso
Dlamini, Jaqueline Kahari, Sanjana Mahapatra, Alexander Kay, Gugu Maphalala, Emily M Mace, George
Makedonas, Jeffrey D Cirillo, Mihai G Netea, Reinout van Crevel, Cristian Coarfa, and Anna M Mandalakas.
DNA hypermethylation during tuberculosis dampens host immune responsiveness. J. Clin. Invest., 130(6):
3113–3123, June 2020.
Hiroko H Dodge, Changyu Shen, Rajesh Pandav, Steven T DeKosky, and Mary Ganguli. Functional transitions
and active life expectancy associated with alzheimer disease. Arch. Neurol., 60(2):253–259, February 2003.
Catherine Dong, Marie Metzger, Einar Holsbø, Vittorio Perduca, and Franck Carbonnel. Systematic review
with meta-analysis: mortality in acute severe ulcerative colitis. Aliment. Pharmacol. Ther., 51(1):8–33,
January 2020.
Pan Du, Xiao Zhang, Chiang-Ching Huang, Nadereh Jafari, Warren A Kibbe, Lifang Hou, and Simon M Lin.
Comparison of beta-value and m-value methods for quantifying methylation levels by microarray analysis.
BMC bioinformatics, 11:1–9, 2010.
Dana Duricova, Natalia Pedersen, Margarita Elkjaer, Michael Gamborg, Pia Munkholm, and Tine Jess. Overall
and cause-specific mortality in crohn’s disease: a meta-analysis of population-based studies. Inflamm. Bowel
Dis., 16(2):347–353, February 2010.
Emerging Risk Factors Collaboration. Life expectancy associated with different ages at diagnosis of type 2
diabetes in high-income countries: 23 million person-years of observation. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol., 11
(10):731–742, October 2023.
Andr´es Esteban-Cantos, Javier Rodr´ıguez-Centeno, Juan C Silla, Pilar Barruz, F´atima S´anchez-Cabo,
Gabriel Saiz-Medrano, Juli´an Nevado, Beatriz Mena-Garay, Mar´ıa Jim´enez-Gonz´alez, Rosa de Miguel,
Jose I Bernardino, Roc´ıo Montejano, Julen Cadi˜nanos, Cristina Marcelo, Luc´ıa Guti´errez-Garc´ıa, Patri-
cia Mart´ınez-Mart´ın, C´edrick Wallet, Franc¸ois Raffi, Berta Rod´es, Jos´e R Arribas, and NEAT001/ANRS143
study group. Effect of HIV infection and antiretroviral therapy initiation on genome-wide DNA methylation
patterns. EBioMedicine, 88(104434):104434, February 2023.
Maria M Esterhuyse, January Weiner, 3rd, Etienne Caron, Andre G Loxton, Marco Iannaccone, Chandre Wag-
man, Philippe Saikali, Kim Stanley, Witold E Wolski, Hans-Joachim Mollenkopf, Matthias Schick, Ruedi
Aebersold, Heinz Linhart, Gerhard Walzl, and Stefan H E Kaufmann. Epigenetics and proteomics join
transcriptomics in the quest for tuberculosis biomarkers. MBio, 6(5):e01187–15, September 2015.
Ewoud Ewing, Lara Kular, Sunjay J Fernandes, Nestoras Karathanasis, Vincenzo Lagani, Sabrina Ruhrmann,
Ioannis Tsamardinos, Jesper Tegner, Fredrik Piehl, David Gomez-Cabrero, and Maja Jagodic. Combin-
ing evidence from four immune cell types identifies DNA methylation patterns that implicate functionally
distinct pathways during multiple sclerosis progression. EBioMedicine, 43:411–423, May 2019.
Evans R Fern´andez P´erez, Craig E Daniels, Darrell R Schroeder, Jennifer St Sauver, Thomas E Hartman,
Brian J Bartholmai, Eunhee S Yi, and Jay H Ryu. Incidence, prevalence, and clinical course of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis: a population-based study. Chest, 137(1):129–137, January 2010.
Eduardo Fernandez-Rebollo, Monika Eipel, Lothar Seefried, Per Hoffmann, Klaus Strathmann, Franz Jakob,
and Wolfgang Wagner. Primary osteoporosis is not reflected by disease-specific DNA methylation or accel-
erated epigenetic age in blood. J. Bone Miner. Res., 33(2):356–361, February 2018.
Kevin R Fontaine, David T Redden, Chenxi Wang, Andrew O Westfall, and David B Allison. Years of life lost
due to obesity. JAMA, 289(2):187–193, January 2003.
Ming Fu, Hongming Zhou, Yushi Li, Hai Jin, and Xiqing Liu. Global, regional, and national burdens of hip
osteoarthritis from 1990 to 2019: estimates from the 2019 global burden of disease study. Arthritis Res.
Ther., 24(1):8, January 2022.
Mary Ganguli, Hiroko H Dodge, Changyu Shen, Rajesh S Pandav, and Steven T DeKosky. Alzheimer disease
and mortality: a 15-year epidemiological study. Arch. Neurol., 62(5):779–784, May 2005.
31

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
GBD 2019 Stroke Collaborators. Global, regional, and national burden of stroke and its risk factors, 1990-2019:
a systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study 2019. Lancet Neurol., 20(10):795–820, October
2021.
Ellen Gelpi, Harald Heinzl, Romana Hoftberger, Ursula Unterberger, Thomas Strobel, Till Voigtlander,
Edita Drobna, Christa Jarius, Susanna Lang, Thomas Waldhor, Hanno Bernheimer, and Herbert Budka.
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in austria: an autopsy-controlled study. Neuroepidemiology, 30(4):215–221, April
2008.
Rodney C P Go, Michael J Corley, G Webster Ross, Helen Petrovitch, Kamal H Masaki, Alika K Maunakea,
Qimei He, and Maarit I Tiirikainen. Genome-wide epigenetic analyses in japanese immigrant plantation
workers with parkinson’s disease and exposure to organochlorines reveal possible involvement of glial genes
and pathways involved in neurotoxicity. BMC Neurosci., 21(1):31, July 2020.
M Goto. Hierarchical deterioration of body systems in werner’s syndrome: implications for normal ageing.
Mech. Ageing Dev., 98(3):239–254, December 1997.
Andrew M Gross, Philipp A Jaeger, Jason F Kreisberg, Katherine Licon, Kristen L Jepsen, Mahdieh Khosro-
heidari, Brenda M Morsey, Susan Swindells, Hui Shen, Cherie T Ng, Ken Flagg, Daniel Chen, Kang Zhang,
Howard S Fox, and Trey Ideker. Methylome-wide analysis of chronic HIV infection reveals five-year in-
crease in biological age and epigenetic targeting of HLA. Mol. Cell, 62(2):157–168, April 2016.
Rebbeca A Grysiewicz, Kurian Thomas, and Dilip K Pandey. Epidemiology of ischemic and hemorrhagic
stroke: incidence, prevalence, mortality, and risk factors. Neurol. Clin., 26(4):871–95, vii, November 2008.
S Gyde, P Prior, M J Dew, V Saunders, J A Waterhouse, and R N Allan.
Mortality in ulcerative colitis.
Gastroenterology, 83(1 Pt 1):36–43, July 1982.
Gregory Hannum, Justin Guinney, Ling Zhao, LI Zhang, Guy Hughes, SriniVas Sadda, Brandy Klotzle, Marina
Bibikova, Jian-Bing Fan, Yuan Gao, et al. Genome-wide methylation profiles reveal quantitative views of
human aging rates. Molecular cell, 49(2):359–367, 2013.
Valma Harjutsalo, Carol Forsblom, and Per-Henrik Groop. Time trends in mortality in patients with type 1
diabetes: nationwide population based cohort study. BMJ, 343(sep08 2):d5364, September 2011.
R Alan Harris, Dorottya Nagy-Szakal, Natalia Pedersen, Antone Opekun, Jiri Bronsky, Pia Munkholm,
Cathrine Jespersgaard, Paalskytt Andersen, Bela Melegh, George Ferry, Tine Jess, and Richard Kellermayer.
Genome-wide peripheral blood leukocyte DNA methylation microarrays identified a single association with
inflammatory bowel diseases. Inflamm. Bowel Dis., 18(12):2334–2341, December 2012.
Adam Hartley, Dominic C Marshall, Justin D Salciccioli, Markus B Sikkel, Mahiben Maruthappu, and Joseph
Shalhoub. Trends in mortality from ischemic heart disease and cerebrovascular disease in europe: 1980 to
2009. Circulation, 133(20):1916–1926, May 2016.
Adrian H Heald, Mike Stedman, Mark Davies, Mark Livingston, Ramadan Alshames, Mark Lunt, Gerry Ray-
man, and Roger Gadsby. Estimating life years lost to diabetes: outcomes from analysis of national diabetes
audit and office of national statistics data. Cardiovasc. Endocrinol. Metab., 9(4):183–185, December 2020.
Raoul C M Hennekam. Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome: review of the phenotype. Am. J. Med. Genet.
A, 140(23):2603–2624, December 2006.
Johannes Hertel, Nele Friedrich, Katharina Wittfeld, Maik Pietzner, Kathrin Budde, Sandra Van der Auwera,
Tobias Lohmann, Alexander Teumer, Henry Voolzke, Matthias Nauck, et al. Measuring biological age via
metabonomics: the metabolic age score. Journal of proteome research, 15(2):400–410, 2016.
Albert T Higgins-Chen, Kyra L Thrush, Yunzhang Wang, Christopher J Minteer, Pei-Lun Kuo, Meng Wang,
Peter Niimi, Gabriel Sturm, Jue Lin, Ann Zenobia Moore, et al. A computational solution for bolstering
reliability of epigenetic clocks: Implications for clinical trials and longitudinal tracking. Nature aging, 2(7):
644–661, 2022.
Nicholas Holzscheck, Cassandra Falckenhayn, J¨orn S¨ohle, Boris Kristof, Ralf Siegner, Andr´e Werner, Janka
Sch¨ossow, Clemens J¨urgens, Henry V¨olzke, Horst Wenck, et al.
Modeling transcriptomic age using
knowledge-primed artificial neural networks. npj Aging and Mechanisms of Disease, 7(1):15, 2021.
Steve Horvath. Dna methylation age of human tissues and cell types. Genome biology, 14:1–20, 2013.
Steve Horvath and Andrew J Levine. HIV-1 infection accelerates age according to the epigenetic clock. J.
Infect. Dis., 212(10):1563–1573, November 2015.
32

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Steve Horvath and Beate R Ritz. Increased epigenetic age and granulocyte counts in the blood of parkinson’s
disease patients. Aging (Albany NY), 7(12):1130–1142, December 2015.
Steve Horvath, Junko Oshima, George M Martin, Ake T Lu, Austin Quach, Howard Cohen, Sarah Felton,
Mieko Matsuyama, Donna Lowe, Sylwia Kabacik, et al. Epigenetic clock for skin and blood cells applied
to hutchinson gilford progeria syndrome and ex vivo studies. Aging (Albany NY), 10(7):1758, 2018.
Tianxiao Huan, Steve Nguyen, Elena Colicino, Carolina Ochoa-Rosales, W David Hill, Jennifer A Brody,
Mette Soerensen, Yan Zhang, Antoine Baldassari, Mohamed Ahmed Elhadad, et al. Integrative analysis of
clinical and epigenetic biomarkers of mortality. Aging cell, 21(6):e13608, 2022.
Lili Huo, Jessica L Harding, Anna Peeters, Jonathan E Shaw, and Dianna J Magliano. Life expectancy of type
1 diabetic patients during 1997-2010: a national australian registry-based cohort study. Diabetologia, 59(6):
1177–1185, June 2016.
John P Hutchinson, Tricia M McKeever, Andrew W Fogarty, Vidya Navaratnam, and Richard B Hubbard.
Increasing global mortality from idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis in the twenty-first century. Ann. Am. Thorac.
Soc., 11(8):1176–1185, October 2014.
Yoshiyuki Ikeda and Mitsuru Ohishi. Years of life lost analysis may promote governmental policy to prevent
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. Circ. J., 83(5):965–966, April 2019.
Geoffrey Istas, Ken Declerck, Maria Pudenz, Katarzyna Szarc Vel Szic, Veronica Lendinez-Tortajada, Montser-
rat Leon-Latre, Karen Heyninck, Guy Haegeman, Jose A Casasnovas, Maria Tellez-Plaza, Clarissa Ger-
hauser, Christian Heiss, Ana Rodriguez-Mateos, and Wim Vanden Berghe. Identification of differentially
methylated BRCA1 and CRISP2 DNA regions as blood surrogate markers for cardiovascular disease. Sci.
Rep., 7(1):5120, July 2017.
L T Jacobsson, W C Knowler, S Pillemer, R L Hanson, D J Pettitt, R G Nelson, A del Puente, D R McCance,
M A Charles, and P H Bennett. Rheumatoid arthritis and mortality. a longitudinal study in pima indians.
Arthritis Rheum., 36(8):1045–1053, August 1993.
Antonio Juli`a, Antonio G´omez, Mar´ıa L´opez-Lasanta, Francisco Blanco, Alba Erra, Antonio Fern´andez-Nebro,
Antonio Juan Mas, Carolina P´erez-Garc´ıa, Ma Luz Garc´ıa Vivar, Sim´on S´anchez-Fern´andez, Mercedes
Alperi-L´opez, Raimon Sanmart´ı, Ana Mar´ıa Ortiz, Carlos Marras Fernandez-Cid, C´esar D´ıaz-Torn´e, Estefa-
nia Moreno, Tianlu Li, Sergio H Mart´ınez-Mateu, Devin M Absher, Richard M Myers, Jes´us Tornero Molina,
and Sara Marsal. Longitudinal analysis of blood DNA methylation identifies mechanisms of response to tu-
mor necrosis factor inhibitor therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. EBioMedicine, 80(104053):104053, June 2022.
Aki Juhani K¨ar¨aj¨am¨aki, Arto Korkiakoski, Janne Hukkanen, Y Antero Kes¨aniemi, and Olavi Ukkola. Long-
term metabolic fate and mortality in obesity without metabolic syndrome. Ann. Med., 54(1):1432–1443,
December 2022.
Changrong Ke, Juanjuan Liang, Mi Liu, Shiwei Liu, and Chunping Wang. Burden of chronic kidney disease
and its risk-attributable burden in 137 low-and middle-income countries, 1990-2019: results from the global
burden of disease study 2019. BMC Nephrol., 23(1):17, January 2022.
Kyeong Min Kim, Hyung Jung Oh, Hyung Yun Choi, Hajeong Lee, and Dong-Ryeol Ryu. Impact of chronic
kidney disease on mortality: A nationwide cohort study. Kidney Res. Clin. Pract., 38(3):382–390, September
2019.
Cari M Kitahara, Alan J Flint, Amy Berrington de Gonzalez, Leslie Bernstein, Michelle Brotzman, Robert J
MacInnis, Steven C Moore, Kim Robien, Philip S Rosenberg, Pramil N Singh, Elisabete Weiderpass,
Hans Olov Adami, Hoda Anton-Culver, Rachel Ballard-Barbash, Julie E Buring, D Michal Freedman,
Gary E Fraser, Laura E Beane Freeman, Susan M Gapstur, John Michael Gaziano, Graham G Giles, Niclas
H˚akansson, Jane A Hoppin, Frank B Hu, Karen Koenig, Martha S Linet, Yikyung Park, Alpa V Patel,
Mark P Purdue, Catherine Schairer, Howard D Sesso, Kala Visvanathan, Emily White, Alicja Wolk, Anne
Zeleniuch-Jacquotte, and Patricia Hartge. Association between class III obesity (BMI of 40-59 kg/m2) and
mortality: a pooled analysis of 20 prospective studies. PLoS Med., 11(7):e1001673, July 2014.
Martin Kolb and Harold R Collard. Staging of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: past, present and future. Eur.
Respir. Rev., 23(132):220–224, June 2014.
D Kornfeld, A Ekbom, and T Ihre. Survival and risk of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with primary sclerosing
cholangitis. a population-based study. Scand. J. Gastroenterol., 32(10):1042–1045, October 1997.
Dmitrii Kriukov, Ekaterina Kuzmina, Evgeniy Efimov, Dmitry V Dylov, and Ekaterina E Khrameeva. Epistemic
uncertainty challenges aging clock reliability in predicting rejuvenation effects. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–12, 2023.
33

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
M Ellen Kuenzig, Douglas G Manuel, Jessy Donelle, and Eric I Benchimol. Life expectancy and health-
adjusted life expectancy in people with inflammatory bowel disease. CMAJ, 192(45):E1394–E1402, Novem-
ber 2020.
Lara Kular, Yun Liu, Sabrina Ruhrmann, Galina Zheleznyakova, Francesco Marabita, David Gomez-Cabrero,
Tojo James, Ewoud Ewing, Magdalena Lind´en, Bartosz G´ornikiewicz, Shahin Aeinehband, Pernilla Stridh,
Jenny Link, Till F M Andlauer, Christiane Gasperi, Heinz Wiendl, Frauke Zipp, Ralf Gold, Bj¨orn Tacken-
berg, Frank Weber, Bernhard Hemmer, Konstantin Strauch, Stefanie Heilmann-Heimbach, Rajesh Rawal,
Ulf Schminke, Carsten O Schmidt, Tim Kacprowski, Andre Franke, Matthias Laudes, Alexander T Dilthey,
Elisabeth G Celius, Helle B Søndergaard, Jesper Tegn´er, Hanne F Harbo, Annette B Oturai, Sigurgeir Olafs-
son, Hannes P Eggertsson, Bjarni V Halldorsson, Haukur Hjaltason, Elias Olafsson, Ingileif Jonsdottir, Kari
Stefansson, Tomas Olsson, Fredrik Piehl, Tomas J Ekstr¨om, Ingrid Kockum, Andrew P Feinberg, and Maja
Jagodic. DNA methylation as a mediator of HLA-DRB1*15:01 and a protective variant in multiple sclerosis.
Nat. Commun., 9(1):2397, June 2018.
Lisa Lancaster, Francesco Bonella, Yoshikazu Inoue, Vincent Cottin, James Siddall, Mark Small, and Jonathan
Langley. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis: Physician and patient perspectives on the pathway to care from
symptom recognition to diagnosis and disease burden. Respirology, 27(1):66–75, January 2022.
Scott D Landes, J Dalton Stevens, and Margaret A Turk. Cause of death in adults with down syndrome in the
united states. Disability and health journal, 13(4):100947, 2020.
Peter Lange, Yunus C¸ olak, Truls Sylvan Ingebrigtsen, Jørgen Vestbo, and Jacob Louis Marott. Long-term
prognosis of asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and asthma-chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease overlap in the copenhagen city heart study: a prospective population-based analysis. Lancet Respir.
Med., 4(6):454–462, June 2016.
M N Lassere, J Rappo, I J Portek, A Sturgess, and J P Edmonds. How many life years are lost in patients
with rheumatoid arthritis? secular cause-specific and all-cause mortality in rheumatoid arthritis, and their
predictors in a long-term australian cohort study. Intern. Med. J., 43(1):66–72, January 2013.
Christian Lee-Rodriguez, Paul Y Wada, Yun-Yi Hung, and Jacek Skarbinski. Association of mortality and
years of potential life lost with active tuberculosis in the united states. JAMA Netw. Open, 3(9):e2014481,
September 2020.
Rebecca A Legarth, Magnus G Ahlstr¨om, Gitte Kronborg, Carsten S Larsen, Court Pedersen, Gitte Pedersen,
Rajesh Mohey, Jan Gerstoft, and Niels Obel. Long-term mortality in HIV-infected individuals 50 years
or older: A nationwide, population-based cohort study. J. Acquir. Immune Defic. Syndr., 71(2):213–218,
February 2016.
Emmanuelle Leray, Sandra Vukusic, Marc Debouverie, Michel Clanet, Bruno Brochet, J´erˆome de S`eze, H´el`ene
Z´ephir, Gilles Defer, Christine Lebrun-Frenay, Thibault Moreau, Pierre Clavelou, Jean Pelletier, Eric Berger,
Philippe Cabre, Jean-Philippe Camdessanch´e, Shoshannah Kalson-Ray, Christian Confavreux, and Gilles
Edan. Excess mortality in patients with multiple sclerosis starts at 20 years from clinical onset: Data from a
large-scale french observational study. PLoS One, 10(7):e0132033, July 2015.
B Lernfelt, M Forsberg, C Blomstrand, D Mellstr¨om, and R Volkmann. Cerebral atherosclerosis as predictor
of stroke and mortality in representative elderly population. Stroke, 33(1):224–229, January 2002.
Morgan E Levine, Ake T Lu, Austin Quach, Brian H Chen, Themistocles L Assimes, Stefania Bandinelli,
Lifang Hou, Andrea A Baccarelli, James D Stewart, Yun Li, et al. An epigenetic biomarker of aging for
lifespan and healthspan. Aging (albany NY), 10(4):573, 2018.
Xue Li, Xiaojin Feng, Xiaodong Sun, Ningning Hou, Fang Han, and Yongping Liu. Global, regional, and
national burden of alzheimer’s disease and other dementias, 1990-2019. Front. Aging Neurosci., 14:937486,
October 2022.
Andrew Y F Li Yim, Nicolette W Duijvis, Jing Zhao, Wouter J de Jonge, Geert R A M D’Haens, Marcel M
A M Mannens, Adri N P M Mul, Anje A Te Velde, and Peter Henneman. Peripheral blood methylation
profiling of female crohn’s disease patients. Clin. Epigenetics, 8(1):65, June 2016.
Chih-Sung Liang, Dian-Jeng Li, Fu-Chi Yang, Ping-Tao Tseng, Andre F Carvalho, Brendon Stubbs, Trevor
Thompson, Christoph Mueller, Jae Il Shin, Joaquim Radua, Robert Stewart, Tarek K Rajji, Yu-Kang Tu,
Tien-Yu Chen, Ta-Chuan Yeh, Chia-Kuang Tsai, Chia-Ling Yu, Chih-Chuan Pan, and Che-Sheng Chu. Mor-
tality rates in alzheimer’s disease and non-alzheimer’s dementias: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Healthy Longev., 2(8):e479–e488, August 2021a.
34

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Chih-Sung Liang, Dian-Jeng Li, Fu-Chi Yang, Ping-Tao Tseng, Andre F Carvalho, Brendon Stubbs, Trevor
Thompson, Christoph Mueller, Jae Il Shin, Joaquim Radua, Robert Stewart, Tarek K Rajji, Yu-Kang Tu,
Tien-Yu Chen, Ta-Chuan Yeh, Chia-Kuang Tsai, Chia-Ling Yu, Chih-Chuan Pan, and Che-Sheng Chu. Mor-
tality rates in alzheimer’s disease and non-alzheimer’s dementias: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Healthy Longev., 2(8):e479–e488, August 2021b.
Josivan Gomes Lima, Lucia Helena C Nobrega, Natalia Nobrega Lima, Marcel Cat˜ao Ferreira Dos Santos,
Pedro Henrique Dantas Silva, Maria de Fatima P Baracho, Debora Nobrega Lima, Julliane Tamara Ara´ujo
de Melo Campos, Leonardo Capistrano Ferreira, Francisco Paulo Freire Neto, Carolina de O Mendes-Aguiar,
and Selma Maria B Jeronimo. Causes of death in patients with Berardinelli-Seip congenital generalized
lipodystrophy. PLoS One, 13(6):e0199052, June 2018.
Qiong Lin and Wolfgang Wagner. Epigenetic aging signatures are coherently modified in cancer. PLoS genetics,
11(6):e1005334, 2015.
Qiong Lin, Carola I Weidner, Ivan G Costa, Riccardo E Marioni, Marcelo RP Ferreira, Ian J Deary, and Wolf-
gang Wagner. Dna methylation levels at individual age-associated cpg sites can be indicative for life ex-
pectancy. Aging (Albany NY), 8(2):394, 2016.
Minbo Liu, Fang Jin, Xiaocong Yao, and Zhongxin Zhu. Disease burden of osteoarthritis of the knee and hip
due to a high body mass index in china and the USA: 1990-2019 findings from the global burden of disease
study 2019. BMC Musculoskelet. Disord., 23(1):63, January 2022.
Q Liu, J Niu, J Huang, Y Ke, X Tang, X Wu, R Li, H Li, X Zhi, K Wang, Y Zhang, and J Lin. Knee osteoarthritis
and all-cause mortality: the wuchuan osteoarthritis study. Osteoarthritis Cartilage, 23(7):1154–1157, July
2015.
Yun Liu, Martin J Aryee, Leonid Padyukov, M Daniele Fallin, Espen Hesselberg, Arni Runarsson, Lovisa
Reinius, Nathalie Acevedo, Margaret Taub, Marcus Ronninger, Klementy Shchetynsky, Annika Scheynius,
Juha Kere, Lars Alfredsson, Lars Klareskog, Tomas J Ekstr¨om, and Andrew P Feinberg. Epigenome-wide
association data implicate DNA methylation as an intermediary of genetic risk in rheumatoid arthritis. Nat.
Biotechnol., 31(2):142–147, February 2013.
Shona J Livingstone, Daniel Levin, Helen C Looker, Robert S Lindsay, Sarah H Wild, Nicola Joss, Graham
Leese, Peter Leslie, Rory J McCrimmon, Wendy Metcalfe, John A McKnight, Andrew D Morris, Donald
W M Pearson, John R Petrie, Sam Philip, Naveed A Sattar, Jamie P Traynor, Helen M Colhoun, Scottish
Diabetes Research Network epidemiology group, and Scottish Renal Registry. Estimated life expectancy in
a scottish cohort with type 1 diabetes, 2008-2010. JAMA, 313(1):37–44, January 2015.
Ana Lleo, Peter Jepsen, Emanuela Morenghi, Marco Carbone, Luca Moroni, Pier Maria Battezzati, Mauro
Podda, Ian R Mackay, M Eric Gershwin, and Pietro Invernizzi. Evolving trends in female to male incidence
and male mortality of primary biliary cholangitis. Sci. Rep., 6:25906, May 2016.
Franc Llorens, Nicole R¨ubsamen, Peter Hermann, Matthias Schmitz, Anna Villar-Piqu´e, Stefan Goebel, Andr´e
Karch, and Inga Zerr.
A prognostic model for overall survival in sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.
Alzheimers. Dement., 16(10):1438–1447, October 2020.
Ake T Lu, Austin Quach, James G Wilson, Alex P Reiner, Abraham Aviv, Kenneth Raj, Lifang Hou, An-
drea A Baccarelli, Yun Li, James D Stewart, et al. Dna methylation grimage strongly predicts lifespan and
healthspan. Aging (albany NY), 11(2):303, 2019.
Ake T Lu, Alexandra M Binder, Joshua Zhang, Qi Yan, Alex P Reiner, Simon R Cox, Janie Corley, Sarah E
Harris, Pei-Lun Kuo, Ann Z Moore, et al. Dna methylation grimage version 2. Aging (Albany NY), 14(23):
9484, 2022.
Hanne Marie Bøe Lunde, J¨org Assmus, Kjell-Morten Myhr, Lars Bø, and Nina Grytten. Survival and cause of
death in multiple sclerosis: a 60-year longitudinal population study. J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry, 88
(8):621–625, August 2017.
Katie Lunnon, Rebecca Smith, Eilis Hannon, Philip L De Jager, Gyan Srivastava, Manuela Volta, Claire
Troakes, Safa Al-Sarraj, Joe Burrage, Ruby Macdonald, Daniel Condliffe, Lorna W Harries, Pavel Kat-
sel, Vahram Haroutunian, Zachary Kaminsky, Catharine Joachim, John Powell, Simon Lovestone, David A
Bennett, Leonard C Schalkwyk, and Jonathan Mill. Methylomic profiling implicates cortical deregulation
of ANK1 in alzheimer’s disease. Nat. Neurosci., 17(9):1164–1170, September 2014.
Katie Lunnon, Rebecca G Smith, Itzik Cooper, Lior Greenbaum, Jonathan Mill, and Michal Schnaider Beeri.
Blood methylomic signatures of presymptomatic dementia in elderly subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Neurobiol. Aging, 36(3):1600.e1–4, March 2015.
35

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Angus D Macleod, Kate S M Taylor, and Carl E Counsell. Mortality in parkinson’s disease: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Mov. Disord., 29(13):1615–1622, November 2014.
Anna Maierhofer, Julia Flunkert, Junko Oshima, George M Martin, Martin Poot, Indrajit Nanda, Marcus Dit-
trich, Tobias M¨uller, and Thomas Haaf. Epigenetic signatures of werner syndrome occur early in life and
are distinct from normal epigenetic aging processes. Aging Cell, 18(5):e12995, October 2019.
Francesco Marabita, Malin Almgren, Mal´ene E Lindholm, Sabrina Ruhrmann, Fredrik Fagerstr¨om-Billai, Maja
Jagodic, Carl J Sundberg, Tomas J Ekstr¨om, Andrew E Teschendorff, Jesper Tegn´er, and David Gomez-
Cabrero. An evaluation of analysis pipelines for DNA methylation profiling using the illumina Human-
Methylation450 BeadChip platform. Epigenetics, 8(3):333–346, March 2013.
Seth S Martin, Aaron W Aday, Zaid I Almarzooq, Cheryl A M Anderson, Pankaj Arora, Christy L Avery,
Carissa M Baker-Smith, Bethany Barone Gibbs, Andrea Z Beaton, Amelia K Boehme, Yvonne Commodore-
Mensah, Maria E Currie, Mitchell S V Elkind, Kelly R Evenson, Giuliano Generoso, Debra G Heard, Swap-
nil Hiremath, Michelle C Johansen, Rizwan Kalani, Dhruv S Kazi, Darae Ko, Junxiu Liu, Jared W Magnani,
Erin D Michos, Michael E Mussolino, Sankar D Navaneethan, Nisha I Parikh, Sarah M Perman, Remy
Poudel, Mary Rezk-Hanna, Gregory A Roth, Nilay S Shah, Marie-Pierre St-Onge, Evan L Thacker, Con-
nie W Tsao, Sarah M Urbut, Harriette G C Van Spall, Jenifer H Voeks, Nae-Yuh Wang, Nathan D Wong,
Sally S Wong, Kristine Yaffe, Latha P Palaniappan, and American Heart Association Council on Epidemi-
ology and Prevention Statistics Committee and Stroke Statistics Subcommittee. 2024 heart disease and
stroke statistics: A report of US and global data from the american heart association. Circulation, 149(8):
e347–e913, February 2024.
Ryan K Masters, Eric N Reither, Daniel A Powers, Y Claire Yang, Andrew E Burger, and Bruce G Link. The
impact of obesity on US mortality levels: the importance of age and cohort factors in population estimates.
Am. J. Public Health, 103(10):1895–1901, October 2013.
Margaret T May, Mark Gompels, Valerie Delpech, Kholoud Porter, Chloe Orkin, Stephen Kegg, Phillip Hay,
Margaret Johnson, Adrian Palfreeman, Richard Gilson, David Chadwick, Fabiola Martin, Teresa Hill, John
Walsh, Frank Post, Martin Fisher, Jonathan Ainsworth, Sophie Jose, Clifford Leen, Mark Nelson, Jane
Anderson, Caroline Sabin, and UK Collaborative HIV Cohort (UK CHIC) Study. Impact on life expectancy
of HIV-1 positive individuals of CD4+ cell count and viral load response to antiretroviral therapy. AIDS, 28
(8):1193–1202, May 2014.
Xiaoyue Mei, Joshua Blanchard, Connor Luellen, Michael J Conboy, and Irina M Conboy. Fail-tests of dna
methylation clocks, and development of a noise barometer for measuring epigenetic pressure of aging and
disease. Aging (Albany NY), 15(17):8552, 2023.
Nicolas A Menzies, Matthew Quaife, Brian W Allwood, Anthony L Byrne, Anna K Coussens, Anthony D
Harries, Florian M Marx, Jamilah Meghji, Debora Pedrazzoli, Joshua A Salomon, Sedona Sweeney, Sanne C
van Kampen, Robert S Wallis, Rein M G J Houben, and Ted Cohen. Lifetime burden of disease due to
incident tuberculosis: a global reappraisal including post-tuberculosis sequelae. Lancet Glob. Health, 9(12):
e1679–e1687, December 2021.
Mahdi Moqri, Chiara Herzog, Jesse R Poganik, Kejun Ying, Jamie N Justice, Daniel W Belsky, Albert T
Higgins-Chen, Brian H Chen, Alan A Cohen, Georg Fuellen, et al. Validation of biomarkers of aging.
Nature Medicine, pp. 1–13, 2024.
Francesco Morandini, Cheyenne Rechsteiner, Kevin Perez, Viviane Praz, Guillermo Lopez Garcia, Laura C
Hinte, Ferdinand von Meyenn, and Alejandro Ocampo. Atac-clock: An aging clock based on chromatin
accessibility. GeroScience, 46(2):1789–1806, 2024.
Dariush Mozaffarian, Aruna Kamineni, Ronald J Prineas, and David S Siscovick. Metabolic syndrome and
mortality in older adults: the cardiovascular health study. Arch. Intern. Med., 168(9):969–978, May 2008.
Christoph Mueller, Pinar Soysal, Arvid Rongve, Ahmet Turan Isik, Trevor Thompson, Stefania Maggi, Lee
Smith, Cristina Basso, Robert Stewart, Clive Ballard, John T O’Brien, Dag Aarsland, Brendon Stubbs, and
Nicola Veronese. Survival time and differences between dementia with lewy bodies and alzheimer’s disease
following diagnosis: A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies. Ageing Res. Rev., 50:72–80, March 2019.
H E Mulnier, H E Seaman, V S Raleigh, S S Soedamah-Muthu, H M Colhoun, and R A Lawrenson. Mortality
in people with type 2 diabetes in the UK. Diabet. Med., 23(5):516–521, May 2006.
Fumiyo Nakagawa, Margaret May, and Andrew Phillips. Life expectancy living with HIV: recent estimates
and future implications. Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis., 26(1):17–25, February 2013.
36

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Maria S Nazarenko, Anton V Markov, Igor N Lebedev, Maxim B Freidin, Aleksei A Sleptcov, Iuliya A Korol-
eva, Aleksei V Frolov, Vadim A Popov, Olga L Barbarash, and Valery P Puzyrev. A comparison of genome-
wide DNA methylation patterns between different vascular tissues from patients with coronary heart disease.
PLoS One, 10(4):e0122601, April 2015.
Yoshito Nishimura, Ko Harada, Toshihiro Koyama, Hideharu Hagiya, and Fumio Otsuka. A nationwide trend
analysis in the incidence and mortality of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in japan between 2005 and 2014. Sci.
Rep., 10(1):15509, September 2020.
Nat´alia Yumi Noronha,
Mariana Barato,
Chanachai Sae-Lee,
Marcela Augusta de Souza Pinhel,
L´ıgia Moriguchi Watanabe,
Vanessa Aparecida Batista Pereira,
Guilherme da Silva Rodrigues,
D´eborah Ara´ujo Morais, Wellington Tavares de Sousa, Jr, Vanessa Cristina de Oliveira Souza, Jessica Ro-
drigues Plac¸a, Wilson Salgado, Jr, Fernando Barbosa, Jr, Torsten Pl¨osch, and Carla Barbosa Nonino. Novel
zinc-related differentially methylated regions in leukocytes of women with and without obesity. Front. Nutr.,
9:785281, March 2022.
Achilles Ntranos, Vasilis Ntranos, Valentina Bonnefil, Jia Liu, Seunghee Kim-Schulze, Ye He, Yunjiao Zhu,
Rachel Brandstadter, Corey T Watson, Andrew J Sharp, Ilana Katz Sand, and Patrizia Casaccia. Fumarates
target the metabolic-epigenetic interplay of brain-homing T cells in multiple sclerosis. Brain, 142(3):647–
661, March 2019.
Padraig Oakley, Steve Kisely, Amanda Baxter, Meredith Harris, Jocelyne Desoe, Alyona Dziouba, and Dan
Siskind. Increased mortality among people with schizophrenia and other non-affective psychotic disorders
in the community: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of psychiatric research, 102:245–253,
2018.
Lisa O’Leary, Laura Hughes-McCormack, Kirsty Dunn, and Sally-Ann Cooper. Early death and causes of
death of people with down syndrome: a systematic review. Journal of Applied Research in Intellectual
Disabilities, 31(5):687–708, 2018.
Mark Olfson, Tobias Gerhard, Cecilia Huang, Stephen Crystal, and T Scott Stroup. Premature mortality among
adults with schizophrenia in the united states. JAMA psychiatry, 72(12):1172–1181, 2015.
Bruna Oriol-Tordera, Maria Berdasco, Anuska Llano, Beatriz Mothe, Cristina G´alvez, Javier Martinez-Picado,
Jorge Carrillo, Juli`a Blanco, Clara Duran-Castells, Carmela Ganoza, Jorge Sanchez, Bonaventura Clotet,
Maria Luz Calle, Alex S´anchez-Pla, Manel Esteller, Christian Brander, and Marta Ruiz-Riol. Methylation
regulation of antiviral host factors, interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) and t-cell responses associated with
natural HIV control. PLoS Pathog., 16(8):e1008678, August 2020.
Bruna Oriol-Tordera, Anna Esteve-Codina, Mar´ıa Berdasco, M´ıriam Ros´as-Umbert, Elena Gonc¸alves, Clara
Duran-Castells, Francesc Catal`a-Moll, Anuska Llano, Samandhy Cede˜no, Maria C Puertas, Martin Tolstrup,
Ole S Søgaard, Bonaventura Clotet, Javier Mart´ınez-Picado, Tom´aˇs Hanke, Behazine Combadiere, Roger
Paredes, Dennis Hartigan-O’Connor, Manel Esteller, Michael Meulbroek, Mar´ıa Luz Calle, Alex Sanchez-
Pla, Jos´e Molt´o, Beatriz Mothe, Christian Brander, and Marta Ruiz-Riol. Epigenetic landscape in the kick-
and-kill therapeutic vaccine BCN02 clinical trial is associated with antiretroviral treatment interruption (ATI)
outcome. EBioMedicine, 78(103956):103956, April 2022.
Junko Oshima and Fuki M Hisama. Search and insights into novel genetic alterations leading to classical and
atypical werner syndrome. Gerontology, 60(3):239–246, January 2014.
Seon Cheol Park, Dong Wook Kim, Eun Cheol Park, Cheung Soo Shin, Chin Kook Rhee, Young Ae Kang, and
Young Sam Kim. Mortality of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a nationwide popula-
tionbased cohort study. Korean J. Intern. Med., 34(6):1272–1278, November 2019.
Ignacio J Posada, Juli´an Benito-Le´on, Elan D Louis, Roc´ıo Trincado, Alberto Villarejo, Mar´ıa Jos´e Medrano,
and F´elix Bermejo-Pareja.
Mortality from parkinson’s disease: a population-based prospective study
(NEDICES). Mov. Disord., 26(14):2522–2529, December 2011.
Angela P Presson, Ginger Partyka, Kristin M Jensen, Owen J Devine, Sonja A Rasmussen, Linda L McCabe,
and Edward RB McCabe. Current estimate of down syndrome population prevalence in the united states.
The Journal of pediatrics, 163(4):1163–1168, 2013.
Annabel Price, Redwan Farooq, Jin-Min Yuan, Vandana B Menon, Rudolf N Cardinal, and John T O’Brien.
Mortality in dementia with lewy bodies compared with alzheimer’s dementia: a retrospective naturalistic
cohort study. BMJ Open, 7(11):e017504, November 2017.
Jonathan Q Purnell. Definitions, classification, and epidemiology of obesity. 2015.
37

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Evgeny Putin, Polina Mamoshina, Alexander Aliper, Mikhail Korzinkin, Alexey Moskalev, Alexey Kolosov,
Alexander Ostrovskiy, Charles Cantor, Jan Vijg, and Alex Zhavoronkov. Deep biomarkers of human aging:
application of deep neural networks to biomarker development. Aging (Albany NY), 8(5):1021, 2016.
Abeer Qannan, Yosra Bejaoui, Mahmoud Izadi, Noha A Yousri, Aleem Razzaq, Colette Christiansen, George M
Martin, Jordana T Bell, Steve Horvath, Junko Oshima, Andre Megarbane, Johan Ericsson, Ehsan Pourkarimi,
and Nady El Hajj. Accelerated epigenetic aging and DNA methylation alterations in Berardinelli-Seip con-
genital lipodystrophy. Hum. Mol. Genet., 32(11):1826–1835, May 2023.
Zhen Qian, Yuancun Li, Zhiqiang Guan, Pi Guo, Ke Zheng, Yali Du, Shengjie Yin, Binyao Chen, Hongxi
Wang, Jiao Jiang, Kunliang Qiu, and Mingzhi Zhang. Global, regional, and national burden of multiple
sclerosis from 1990 to 2019: Findings of global burden of disease study 2019. Front. Public Health, 11:
1073278, February 2023.
Vardhman K Rakyan, Huriya Beyan, Thomas A Down, Mohammed I Hawa, Siarhei Maslau, Deeqo Aden,
Antoine Daunay, Florence Busato, Charles A Mein, Burkhard Manfras, Kerith-Rae M Dias, Christopher G
Bell, J¨org Tost, Bernhard O Boehm, Stephan Beck, and R David Leslie. Identification of type 1 diabetes-
associated DNA methylation variable positions that precede disease diagnosis. PLoS Genet., 7(9):e1002300,
September 2011.
Bruno Ramos-Molina, Lidia S´anchez-Alcoholado, Amanda Cabrera-Mulero, Raul Lopez-Dominguez, Pedro
Carmona-Saez, Eduardo Garcia-Fuentes, Isabel Moreno-Indias, and Francisco J Tinahones. Gut microbiota
composition is associated with the global DNA methylation pattern in obesity. Front. Genet., 10:613, July
2019.
Asma Rashki Kemmak, Aziz Rezapour, Reza Jahangiri, Shima Nikjoo, Hiro Farabi, and Samira Soleimanpour.
Economic burden of osteoporosis in the world: A systematic review. Med. J. Islam. Repub. Iran, 34:154,
November 2020.
Araz Rawshani, Naveed Sattar, Stefan Franz´en, Aidin Rawshani, Andrew T Hattersley, Ann-Marie Svensson,
Bj¨orn Eliasson, and Soffia Gudbj¨ornsdottir. Excess mortality and cardiovascular disease in young adults with
type 1 diabetes in relation to age at onset: a nationwide, register-based cohort study. Lancet, 392(10146):
477–486, August 2018.
Lindsay M Reynolds, Jackson R Taylor, Jingzhong Ding, Kurt Lohman, Craig Johnson, David Siscovick, Gre-
gory Burke, Wendy Post, Steven Shea, David R Jacobs, Jr, Hendrik Stunnenberg, Stephen B Kritchevsky, Ina
Hoeschele, Charles E McCall, David Herrington, Russell P Tracy, and Yongmei Liu. Age-related variations
in the methylome associated with gene expression in human monocytes and T cells. Nat. Commun., 5(1):
5366, November 2014.
Brooke Rhead, Calliope Holingue, Michael Cole, Xiaorong Shao, Hong L Quach, Diana Quach, Khooshbu
Shah, Elizabeth Sinclair, John Graf, Thomas Link, Ruby Harrison, Elior Rahmani, Eran Halperin, Wei
Wang, Gary S Firestein, Lisa F Barcellos, and Lindsey A Criswell. Rheumatoid arthritis naive T cells share
hypermethylation sites with synoviocytes. Arthritis Rheumatol., 69(3):550–559, March 2017.
Janou A Y Roubroeks, Adam R Smith, Rebecca G Smith, Ehsan Pishva, Zina Ibrahim, Martina Sattlecker,
Eilis J Hannon, Iwona Kłoszewska, Patrizia Mecocci, Hilkka Soininen, Magda Tsolaki, Bruno Vellas, Lars-
Olof Wahlund, Dag Aarsland, Petroula Proitsi, Angela Hodges, Simon Lovestone, Stephen J Newhouse,
Richard J B Dobson, Jonathan Mill, Dani¨el L A van den Hove, and Katie Lunnon. An epigenome-wide
association study of alzheimer’s disease blood highlights robust DNA hypermethylation in the HOXB6 gene.
Neurobiol. Aging, 95:26–45, November 2020.
Paz L D Ruiz, Lei Chen, Jedidiah I Morton, Agus Salim, Bendix Carstensen, Edward W Gregg, Meda E Pavkov,
Manel Mata-Cases, Didac Mauricio, Gregory A Nichols, Santa Pildava, Stephanie H Read, Sarah H Wild,
Jonathan E Shaw, and Dianna J Magliano. Mortality trends in type 1 diabetes: a multicountry analysis of six
population-based cohorts. Diabetologia, 65(6):964–972, June 2022.
Jarod Rutledge, Hamilton Oh, and Tony Wyss-Coray. Measuring biological age using omics data. Nature
Reviews Genetics, 23(12):715–727, 2022.
Lisa Ruvuna and Akshay Sood. Epidemiology of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Clin. Chest Med., 41
(3):315–327, September 2020.
Lotte Saaby, Tina Svenstrup Poulsen, Axel Cosmus Pyndt Diederichsen, Susanne Hosbond, Torben Bjerregaard
Larsen, Henrik Schmidt, Oke Gerke, Jesper Hallas, Kristian Thygesen, and Hans Mickley. Mortality rate in
type 2 myocardial infarction: observations from an unselected hospital cohort. Am. J. Med., 127(4):295–302,
April 2014.
38

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Sanish Sathyan, Emmeline Ayers, Tina Gao, Erica F Weiss, Sofiya Milman, Joe Verghese, and Nir Barzilai.
Plasma proteomic profile of age, health span, and all-cause mortality in older adults. Aging Cell, 19(11):
e13250, 2020.
Mehmet Sayiner, Pegah Golabi, Maria Stepanova, Issah Younossi, Fatema Nader, Andrei Racila, and Zobair M
Younossi. Primary biliary cholangitis in medicare population: The impact on mortality and resource use.
Hepatology, 69(1):237–244, January 2019.
Franziska Schnabel, Uwe Kornak, and Bernd Wollnik. Premature aging disorders: A clinical and genetic
compendium. Clin. Genet., 99(1):3–28, January 2021.
M Seip and O Trygstad. Generalized lipodystrophy, congenital and acquired (lipoatrophy). Acta Paediatr.
Suppl., 413:2–28, June 1996.
Christian P Selinger and Rupert W Leong. Mortality from inflammatory bowel diseases. Inflamm. Bowel Dis.,
18(8):1566–1572, August 2012.
Eyal Shahar, Seungmin Lee, Joseph Kim, Sue Duval, Cheryl Barber, and Russell V Luepker. Hospitalized heart
failure: rates and long-term mortality. J. Card. Fail., 10(5):374–379, October 2004.
Adam C Sheka, Oyedele Adeyi, Julie Thompson, Bilal Hameed, Peter A Crawford, and Sayeed Ikramuddin.
Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis: A review. JAMA, 323(12):1175–1183, March 2020.
C G Solomon and J E Manson. Obesity and mortality: a review of the epidemiologic data. Am. J. Clin. Nutr.,
66(4 Suppl):1044S–1050S, October 1997.
Carolina Soriano-T´arraga, Jordi Jim´enez-Conde, Eva Giralt-Steinhauer, Marina Mola-Caminal, Rosa M
Vivanco-Hidalgo, Angel Ois, Ana Rodr´ıguez-Campello, Elisa Cuadrado-Godia, Sergi Sayols-Baixeras,
Roberto Elosua, Jaume Roquer, and GENESTROKE Consortium. Epigenome-wide association study iden-
tifies TXNIP gene associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus and sustained hyperglycemia. Hum. Mol. Genet.,
25(3):609–619, February 2016.
K Sutton-Tyrrell, H G Alcorn, H Herzog, S F Kelsey, and L H Kuller. Morbidity, mortality, and antihypertensive
treatment effects by extent of atherosclerosis in older adults with isolated systolic hypertension. Stroke, 26
(8):1319–1324, August 1995.
Weiyang Tao, Arno N Concepcion, Marieke Vianen, Anne C A Marijnissen, Floris P G J Lafeber, Timothy R
D J Radstake, and Aridaman Pandit. Multiomics and machine learning accurately predict clinical response
to adalimumab and etanercept therapy in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Rheumatol., 73(2):
212–222, February 2021.
Marcello Tonelli, Natasha Wiebe, Bruce Culleton, Andrew House, Chris Rabbat, Mei Fok, Finlay McAlister,
and Amit X Garg. Chronic kidney disease and mortality risk: a systematic review. J. Am. Soc. Nephrol., 17
(7):2034–2047, July 2006.
Adam Trickey, Caroline A Sabin, Greer Burkholder, Heidi Crane, Antonella d’Arminio Monforte, Matthias
Egger, M John Gill, Sophie Grabar, Jodie L Guest, Inma Jarrin, Fiona C Lampe, Niels Obel, Juliana M Reyes,
Christoph Stephan, Timothy R Sterling, Ramon Teira, Giota Touloumi, Jan-Christian Wasmuth, Ferdinand
Wit, Linda Wittkop, Robert Zangerle, Michael J Silverberg, Amy Justice, and Jonathan A C Sterne. Life
expectancy after 2015 of adults with HIV on long-term antiretroviral therapy in europe and north america: a
collaborative analysis of cohort studies. Lancet HIV, 10(5):e295–e307, May 2023.
Ga¨el Varoquaux and Veronika Cheplygina. Machine learning for medical imaging: methodological failures
and recommendations for the future. NPJ digital medicine, 5(1):48, 2022.
Miri Varshavsky, Gil Harari, Benjamin Glaser, Yuval Dor, Ruth Shemer, and Tommy Kaplan. Accurate age pre-
diction from blood using a small set of dna methylation sites and a cohort-based machine learning algorithm.
Cell Reports Methods, 3(9), 2023.
N T Ventham, N A Kennedy, A T Adams, R Kalla, S Heath, K R O’Leary, H Drummond, IBD BIOM con-
sortium, IBD CHARACTER consortium, D C Wilson, I G Gut, E R Nimmo, and J Satsangi. Integrative
epigenome-wide analysis demonstrates that DNA methylation may mediate genetic risk in inflammatory
bowel disease. Nat. Commun., 7:13507, November 2016.
Laura Vidal-Bralo, Yolanda Lopez-Golan, and Antonio Gonzalez. Simplified assay for epigenetic age estima-
tion in whole blood of adults. Frontiers in genetics, 7:126, 2016.
Allison W Willis, Mario Schootman, Nathan Kung, Bradley A Evanoff, Joel S Perlmutter, and Brad A Racette.
Predictors of survival in patients with parkinson disease. Arch. Neurol., 69(5):601–607, May 2012.
39

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Alison K Wright, Evangelos Kontopantelis, Richard Emsley, Iain Buchan, Naveed Sattar, Martin K Rutter, and
Darren M Ashcroft. Life expectancy and cause-specific mortality in type 2 diabetes: A population-based
cohort study quantifying relationships in ethnic subgroups. Diabetes Care, 40(3):338–345, March 2017.
Sheng Hui Wu, Zhong Liu, and Suzanne C Ho. Metabolic syndrome and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis
of prospective cohort studies. Eur. J. Epidemiol., 25(6):375–384, June 2010.
Xian Xia, Xingwei Chen, Gang Wu, Fang Li, Yiyang Wang, Yang Chen, Mingxu Chen, Xinyu Wang, Weiyang
Chen, Bo Xian, et al. Three-dimensional facial-image analysis to predict heterogeneity of the human ageing
rate and the impact of lifestyle. Nature metabolism, 2(9):946–957, 2020.
Xian Xia, Yiyang Wang, Zhengqing Yu, Jiawei Chen, and Jing-Dong J Han. Assessing the rate of aging to
monitor aging itself. Ageing Research Reviews, 69:101350, 2021.
Ying Xian, Robert G Holloway, Wenqin Pan, and Eric D Peterson. Challenges in assessing hospital-level stroke
mortality as a quality measure: comparison of ischemic, intracerebral hemorrhage, and total stroke mortality
rates. Stroke, 43(6):1687–1690, June 2012.
Shiyu Xiao, Wenhui Xie, Yinghui Zhang, Lei Lei, and Yan Pan. Changing epidemiology of cirrhosis from 2010
to 2019: results from the global burden disease study 2019. Ann. Med., 55(2):2252326, 2023.
Jane Xu, Ching S Wan, Kiriakos Ktoris, Esmee M Reijnierse, and Andrea B Maier. Sarcopenia is associated
with mortality in adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Gerontology, 68(4):361–376, 2022.
Kejun Ying, Seth Paulson, Alec Eames, Alexander Tyshkovskiy, Siyuan Li, Martin Perez-Guevara, Mehrnoosh
Emamifar, Maximiliano Casas Mart´ınez, Dayoon Kwon, Anna Kosheleva, et al. A unified framework for
systematic curation and evaluation of aging biomarkers. bioRxiv, pp. 2023–12, 2023.
Kejun Ying, Hanna Liu, Andrei E Tarkhov, Marie C Sadler, Ake T Lu, Mahdi Moqri, Steve Horvath, Zolt´an
Kutalik, Xia Shen, and Vadim N Gladyshev.
Causality-enriched epigenetic age uncouples damage and
adaptation. Nature Aging, pp. 1–16, 2024.
Zobair Younossi, Frank Tacke, Marco Arrese, Barjesh Chander Sharma, Ibrahim Mostafa, Elisabetta Bugianesi,
Vincent Wai-Sun Wong, Yusuf Yilmaz, Jacob George, Jiangao Fan, and Miriam B Vos. Global perspectives
on nonalcoholic fatty liver disease and nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. Hepatology, 69(6):2672–2682, June
2019.
Ming Yu, William D Hazelton, Georg E Luebeck, and William M Grady. Epigenetic aging: more than just a
clock when it comes to cancer. Cancer research, 80(3):367–374, 2020.
Nicholas Chak Lam Yung, Corine Sau Man Wong, Joe Kwun Nam Chan, Eric Yu Hai Chen, and Wing Chung
Chang. Excess mortality and life-years lost in people with schizophrenia and other non-affective psychoses:
an 11-year population-based cohort study. Schizophrenia Bulletin, 47(2):474–484, 2021.
Qian Zhang, Costanza L Vallerga, Rosie M Walker, Tian Lin, Anjali K Henders, Grant W Montgomery, Ji He,
Dongsheng Fan, Javed Fowdar, Martin Kennedy, et al. Improved precision of epigenetic clock estimates
across tissues and its implication for biological ageing. Genome medicine, 11:1–11, 2019.
Xinyu Zhang, Amy C Justice, Ying Hu, Zuoheng Wang, Hongyu Zhao, Guilin Wang, Eric O Johnson, Brinda
Emu, Richard E Sutton, John H Krystal, and Ke Xu. Epigenome-wide differential DNA methylation between
HIV-infected and uninfected individuals. Epigenetics, 11(10):750–760, October 2016.
Xinyu Zhang, Ying Hu, Amy C Justice, Boyang Li, Zuoheng Wang, Hongyu Zhao, John H Krystal, and Ke Xu.
DNA methylation signatures of illicit drug injection and hepatitis C are associated with HIV frailty. Nat.
Commun., 8(1):2243, December 2017a.
Xinyu Zhang, Ying Hu, Bradley E Aouizerat, Gang Peng, Vincent C Marconi, Michael J Corley, Todd Hulgan,
Kendall J Bryant, Hongyu Zhao, John H Krystal, Amy C Justice, and Ke Xu. Machine learning selected
smoking-associated DNA methylation signatures that predict HIV prognosis and mortality. Clin. Epigenet-
ics, 10(1):155, December 2018.
Yuqing Zhang, Na Lu, Christine Peloquin, Maureen Dubreuil, Tuhina Neogi, J Antonio Avi˜na-Zubieta, Sha-
ran K Rai, and Hyon K Choi. Improved survival in rheumatoid arthritis: a general population-based cohort
study. Ann. Rheum. Dis., 76(2):408–413, February 2017b.
Alex Zhavoronkov, Kirill Kochetov, Peter Diamandis, and Maria Mitina. Psychoage and subjage: development
of deep markers of psychological and subjective age using artificial intelligence. Aging (Albany NY), 12(23):
23548, 2020.
40

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
Rongrong Zhu, Shan Zhou, Liang Xia, and Xiaoming Bao. Incidence, morbidity and years lived with disability
due to type 2 diabetes mellitus in 204 countries and territories: Trends from 1990 to 2019. Front. Endocrinol.
(Lausanne), 13:905538, July 2022a.
Rongrong Zhu, Shan Zhou, Liang Xia, and Xiaoming Bao. Incidence, morbidity and years lived with disability
due to type 2 diabetes mellitus in 204 countries and territories: Trends from 1990 to 2019. Front. Endocrinol.
(Lausanne), 13:905538, July 2022b.
41
</appendix>

